                                                The IdLift Model: A Brief Description
                    GENERAL STRUCTURE OF THE I-O TABLE
                        The input-output table for the IdLift model is a 97 sector commodity by commodity table.  It
                    is derived from the 1987 Benchmark I-O study using the purification algorithm described by
                    Almon (1999), with certain redefinitions of sectors.  The first 87 sectors comprise the private
                    economy, 88 and 89 are government enterprises, and 93 is government industry.  The other
                    sectors from 90 to 97 are special industries.  The sectoring classification is listed at the back of
                    this document.
                    FINAL DEMAND EXPENDITURE COMPONENTS
                    Categories to be Bridged
                    •    Personal Consumption Expenditures (92 categories), passed through consumption bridge (97x92)
                    •    Equipment Investment (55 categories), passed through capital flow matrix (97x55)
                                                                st
                    •    Private Construction (25-order, 1  19, plus category 25 are private), passed through construction
                         bridge (97x25)
                    •    Federal Defense Consumption and Investment (25 categories), passed through defense bridge (97x25)
                    •    Federal Nondefense Consumption and Investment (8 categories), passed through nondefense bridge
                         (97x8)
                    •    State & Local Education Consumption and Investment (7 categories), passed through education
                         bridge (97x7)
                    •    State & Local Health Consumption and Investment (7 categories), passed through health bridge
                         (97x7)
                    •    State & Local Other Consumption and Investment (7 categories), passed through other bridge (97x7)
                    •    Government Construction (5 categories), passed through government structures bridge (25x5), then
                         passed through construction bridge.
                    Final Demands by I-O Commodity
                    •    Personal Consumption Expenditures
                    •    Producers’ Durable Equipment
                    •    Private Structures by Commodity
                    •    Government Structures by Commodity
                    •    Inventory Change
                    •    Federal Defense
                    •    Federal Nondefense
                    •    State & Local Education
                    •    State & Local Health
                    •    State & Local Other
                    •    Exports
                    •    Imports
                    Summary of IdLift                                        1                                                Inforum
                    Value Added Components (51 industries)
                    •    Labor Compensation
                    •      Wages and Salaries
                    •      Supplements
                    •         Employer Contributions for Social Insurance
                    •         Benefits
                    •            Health Benefits
                    •            Pension Benefits
                    •            Other Benefits
                    •    Return to Capital
                    •      Corporate Profits
                    •      Proprietors’ Income
                    •      Corporate Capital Consumption Allowances
                    •      Noncorporate Capital Consumption Allowances
                    •      Corporate Inventory Valuation Adjustment
                    •      Noncorporate Inventory Valuation Adjustment
                    •      Net Interest Payments
                    •      Business Transfer Payments
                    •      Rental Income of Persons
                    •      Government Subsidies Less Surplus
                    •    Indirect Business Taxes
                    •      Excise and Sales Tax
                    •      Value Added Tax
                    •      Energy Tax
                    •      Other Indirect Tax
                    Prices
                    •    Producers’ Prices (97 commodities)
                    •    Consumer Prices (92 categories)
                    •    Equipment Investment Prices (55 industries)
                    •    Construction Prices (25 categories), used for both private and government construction
                    •    Foreign Price of Imports (97 commodities)
                    •    Foreign Price of Competing Exports (97 commodities)
                    •    Federal Defense Deflators (25 categories)
                    •    Federal Nondefense Deflators (8 categories)
                    •    State & Local Education Deflators (7 categories)
                    •    State & Local Health Deflators (7 categories)
                    •    State & Local Other Deflators (7 categories
                    Summary of IdLift                                        2                                                Inforum
                OTHER MATRICES USED IN THE MODEL
                •   Consumption Bridge Matrix  - This bridge links personal consumption expenditures by 92 consumer
                    categories to personal consumption at the commodity level, stripping off trade and transportation
                    margins.  It is also used in the reverse direction to form consumer prices from producers’ prices.
                •   Investment Bridge Matrix – The investment bridge matrix, or “capital flow table” links investment by
                    55 purchasing industries to producers’ durable equipment at the commodity level, allocating
                    expenditures by type of investment good, and stripping off trade and transportation margins.  This
                    matrix is also used in the reverse direction to form equipment investment prices at the 55 industry
                    level.
                •   Construction Bridge Matrix – Links construction by 25 categories of public and private to the 97
                    commodity level.  It distributes construction expenditures by type of material, as well as allocating
                    margin expenditures.  Value added for construction is in the new construction row (7).  This bridge
                    serves double duty, bridging private construction and public construction in two different places in
                    the model.  It is also used to form private and government construction prices.
                •   Defense Bridge Matrix – Links defense consumption and investment expenditures by 25 categories
                    (similar to those found in the national accounts) to expenditures by input-output commodity.  It is
                    used in the reverse direction to obtain prices by defense expenditure category.
                •   Nondefense Bridge Matrix – Links federal nondefense consumption and investment expenditures by 8
                    categories to the commodity level.
                •   State & Local Education Bridge Matrix – Links 7 categories of education consumption and
                    investment to the commodity level.
                •   State & Local Health Bridge Matrix – Links 7 categories of education consumption and investment to
                    the commodity level.
                •   State & Local Other Bridge Matrix – Links 7 categories of education consumption and investment to
                    the commodity level.
                •   Product to Industry Bridge – Relates commodity value added (97 commodities) to industry value
                    added (51 industries), and vice-versa.
                THE REAL SIDE
                Personal Consumption
                    The personal consumption equations have been estimated using PADS (the Perhaps Adequate
                Demand System) for 92 categories of consumption expenditure, divided into 9 groups.  A cross-
                sectional equation is used to get the impacts of demographic variables and to estimate the Engel
                curve for each good.  The result of this equation is then used as the “income” term in the time-
                series equations,
                    The cross-section equations are of the following form:
                   *     K         L       G      
                 Ci =a+ ∑bkYk+∑dlDl∑wgng
                         k=1      l=1     g=1     
                                                    
                    where:
                    C*=household consumption expenditures on good i
                      i
                    Yk=the amount of per-capita income (expenditures) within income category k
                Summary of IdLift                              3                                        Inforum
                    Dl = dummy variable used to show membership in the jth demographic group
                    ng =number of household members in age category g
                    w =adult equivalency weights
                      g
                    K =the number of income groups
                    L =the number of demographic categories
                    G=the number of age groups
                    The demographic categories D include region of residence, family size, working status of
                spouse, college education, and age of household head, all estimated using dummy variables.  The
                left-hand side result of this equation is known to us by the name of “C-star”.  The two terms in
                the first factor of the equation are the “piecewise linear Engel curve” and the demographic term.
                The second factor of this equation is the age-weighted population.
                    The PADS equations take the form:
                                                                       −          −         −
                                                            λ           λksk       µG       νG
                                  *          *   p  i n  p        p       p 
                                Cc         Cc       i        i        i       i 
                 x (t) = a (t) +b        +c∆               ∏
                  i      i     i   P    i     P      k=1                      
                                                 P        p          p         p
                                                                   k        G  g
                    where:
                         C*=cross-section expenditures for corresponding cross-section category c
                           c
                         P=overall consumption price index
                         p =the price of good i
                           i
                         p =the average price index of group G
                           G = the average price of subgroup g
                         p
                           g
                         λi=individual good price response parameter
                         µG=group price response parameter
                        νg =subgroup price response parameter
                Exports
                    The Inforum bilateral trade model (BTM) forecasts bilateral trade flows for 120 commodities,
                by 14 trading partners and two regions covering the rest of the world.  The forecasting equations
                are based on annual OECD and UN data on international trade by commodity and country of
                origin.  For 13 of the trading partners, Inforum models are available, which forecast imports and
                domestic prices endogenously.
                    As an alternative to taking exports exogenously from BTM, we have also estimated export
                equations similar to those used in the previous Inforum international system.  The form of these
                export equations is:
                Summary of IdLift                               4                                       Inforum
                                                                                                                                           d η
                                                                                                15 w m  p 
                                                           E =b +b∑ k kit it
                                                                 it              0           1k=1          m  f
                                                                                                                 ki0                p
                                                                                                                                          it 
                                                           where:
                                                                          Eit = U.S. exports of commodity i for year t
                                                                          w =the fraction of U.S. imports which went to trading partner k in the base year (1987)
                                                                               k
                                                                         mkit = imports to country k for commodity i in year t
                                                                         mki0 = imports to country k for commodity i for the base year
                                                                           p =a moving average of the domestic price
                                                                               it
                                                                           f it = a moving average of a weighted exchange rate adjusted price of competing
                                                exporters.
                                                          In contrast to the older LIFT equations of this form, these equations were all estimated with
                                                data from the BTM database,  and the forecasts from BTM are still used to obtain the foreign
                                                import demands and foreign prices.  However, this form allows the IdLift equations to adjust
                                                independently from BTM.  These equations, like all others in the model, can be turned on or off.
                                                Equipment Investment
                                                          IdLift forecasts purchases of equipment investment for 55 industries comprising the U.S.
                                                economy.  Sales of investment goods at the 97 commodity level are then determined by passing
                                                equipment investment by buyer through the investment bridge matrix. The investment equations
                                                are estimated in a two-stage, three equation framework.  Factor demands for equipment capital,
                                                labor and energy are estimated simultaneously.  In the first stage, optimal capital-output, labor-
                                                output and energy-output ratios are estimated.  In the second stage, the parameters from the first
                                                stage are treated as fixed, and equations for net investment, labor and energy are estimated.  In
                                                this stage, investment is based upon a distributed lag on past changes in output, whereas labor
                                                and energy demand are based upon a distributed lag of levels of output.
                                                          The first stage equation for the optimal capital-output ratio is obtained by using Shephard’s
                                                Lemma with a generalized Leontief cost function with equipment, labor and energy to obtain:
                                                                                  *                                                                                        1
                                                               K                                                                                    pj 2
                                                                                              −            +
                                                                            =e aK1t1 aK2t2 ∑ bKj                                                                     
                                                               Q                                                       j=K,L,E                      p  
                                                                                                                                                               K
                                                                               t                                                                                       
                                                                                                                                                                             
                                                          where:
                                                                          K =capital stock
                                                                         Q=output
                                                                                          *
                                                                         K  =the optimal capital-output ratio
                                                                                      
                                                                         Q
                                                                                      
                                                                                          t
                                                                           pj = price of factor j, where j = K, L, E
                                                Summary of IdLift                                                                                                                             5                                                                                                                         Inforum
                             t =time trend
                              1
                                   nd
                             t =2  time trend, starting in 1970
                              2
                       This equation is used in a three equation system to fit the historical capital-output, labor-
                   output and energy-output ratios.
                       The equation for net investment is derived from the first difference of the optimal capital
                   stock equation and can be expressed by:
                                                            1
                               −    +                pj 2 3
                           =e aK1t1 aK2t2  ∑              ∑ K∆Q
                       Nt                        bKj            wj      t− j
                                         j=K,L,E     pK  j=0
                                                             
                                                             
                       where:
                             Nt = net investment
                             ∆Q=the change in output
                       The price of capital  p is the commonly used neoclassical measure:
                                                   K
                              p (r +dep)(1−tz−C)
                        p = eq
                          K            1−T
                       where:
                              p =the equipment price deflator for this purchasing industry
                               eq
                             r = the real AAA bond rate
                             dep= the average depreciation rate for this industry
                             T=the effective corporate tax rate
                             z = the present value of depreciation of one dollar worth of investment
                             c = the investment tax credit
                       Replacement investment is determined by multiplying the optimal capital output ratio by the
                   losses to capacity (as the level of optimal output given the current capital stock) occurring in the
                   current year.  Since the optimal capital-output ratio is a function of relative prices, price change
                   affects both the demand for net investment and replacement investment.
                   Private Construction by Type
                       The equations for private purchases of plant and other structures are for 19 categories of
                   construction available from the National Income and Product Accounts.  These purchases are
                   generally aggregated into two major divisions.  Residential construction consists of single- and
                   multi-family homes, and additions and alterations.  Non-residential construction is comprised of
                   a motley of different types: hotels, industrial buildings, office buildings, schools, farm buildings,
                   oil wells, railroads, telephone and communications, electric and gas utilities, and petroleum
                   Summary of IdLift                                       6                                              Inforum
                             pipelines.  The residential equations are estimated in per-capita form, and based on disposable
                             income per capita, the mortgage interest rate, and the percent of households of home-buying age.
                             The non-residential constructions are each unique, but often based on the output of the related
                             industry or group of industries, the relative price of the related industry (especially in the case of
                             oil and drilling rigs), interest rates, and a variety of demographic variables.  Some of the
                             equations also use a measure of capital stock of structures of that type, to model replacement
                             investment needs.
                             Government Consumption and Investment
                                   Only consumption purchases are included in the presentation of the government budget.
                             However, investment is accumulated into a book value stock, and the depreciation of this stock is
                             the capital consumption of government.  This capital consumption is part of current consumption
                             expenditures.
                                   IdLift has an accounting for the government capital stock, and capital consumption equations
                             that relate capital consumption to the calculated depreciation from this stock.  This capital
                             consumption is part of the current government budget, and also shows up in the non-corporate
                             capital consumption vector in the income side of the model.
                                   Aside from capital consumption, the other categories of government consumption and
                             investment are exogenous.  There are five categories of government spending: federal defense,
                             federal nondefense, state & local education, state & local health and state & local other.  For
                             each category, there is a bridge that translates purchases by type to purchases by input-output
                             commodity.  For example, the bridge for federal defense spending has 97 rows and 25 columns.
                             Output Calculation
                                   To calculate output by industry, the sources of demand by commodity arising from personal
                             consumption, equipment investment, structures investment, government and exports are first
                             added together to form a vector of final demand.  Then the Seidel iterative technique is used to
                             jointly solve for domestic output, imports and inventory change by industry.
                                   The Seidel algorithm in IdLift solves by iteratively calculating
                                                          k+1+                k +     −       +
                                               ∑aq ∑aq v m d
                                       k+1     j<i    ij   j       j>i   ij   j      i       i      i
                                    q =
                                      i                              1−a
                                                                             ii
                                   where:
                                            qk= the solution for output of commodity i in iteration k
                                               i
                                            aij =the direct input-output coefficient from commodity i to commodity j
                                              f i = the sum of final demand for commodity i excluding imports, inventory change, and
                             discrepancy
                                            vi = inventory change for commodity i
                                            mi =imports for commodity i
                             Summary of IdLift                                                                     7                                                                        Inforum
                         di= final demand discrepancy for commodity i
                    A triangulation ordering typically optimizes the loop over commodities, so that the solution is
                as recursive as possible.  Within the loop for each commodity, the equations for inventory
                change and imports are also calculated.
                    One complication is the final demand discrepancy, which is the approach we have taken to
                handle the inconsistencies between input-output tables, final demand data and output data.  The
                discrepancy d is formed in the last year of output data as d = q – Aq – f – v + m, where d is the
                final demand discrepancy,  q is output,  A  is the direct requirements matrix,  f is other final
                demand, and v is inventory change and m is imports.  In the forecast periods, the discrepancy is
                kept constant, and added back in during the Seidel solution.
                    The import equations are based on domestic demand, calculated in the regressions as dd = q +
                m – x , where dd is domestic demand, and x is exports.  However, when solving for imports, m
                and q are still unknown, so we use instead dd = Aq + f           + v + d, where q is the best current
                guess of output for the current iteration.
                Inventory Change
                    The form of the inventory equations is:
                    vi = β + β USEi+β ∆USEi
                          0    1         2
                    where:
                         USE =q(1−a )+m −v
                              i   i     ii   i   i
                Labor Productivity, Average Hours Worked and Employment
                    The labor productivity equations we use can be written as:
                    lnq =     +      +     +    qup+    qdown
                       h β0 β1t1 β2t2 β3             β4
                         
                    where:
                         q = output
                         h = hours worked
                         t =a simple linear time trend
                          1
                         t2 = a second time trend, starting in 1972
                         qup=dq, when positive, 0 otherwise
                         qdown= −dq, when dq negative, 0 otherwise
                         dq= lnq −lnqpeak
                                 t           t−1
                         qpeak = q , if q >qpeak (1−spill) , otherwise = qpeak (1−spill)
                                t   t      t         t−1                             t−1
                         spill = depreciation rate of capacity, both in the sense of capital and “hoarded” labor
                Summary of IdLift                               8                                       Inforum
                                                   The second time trend picks up a change in the rate of labor productivity growth that began
                                          sometime in the 1969 to 1973 period.  The qup and qdown terms model the increase in labor
                                          productivity that is observed in periods of increasing output, and vice-versa.  This phenomenon
                                          of procyclical labor productivity is sometimes associated with “labor hoarding”, where firms
                                          retain trained workers in periods of slack output.  When output increases again, they put the
                                          hoarded labor back to work before making new hires.   The qpeak variable attempts to measure
                                          capacity output, both in the sense of capital and “hoarded” labor.
                                                   The equations for hours worked relate annual hours worked per employee to a time trend and
                                          cyclical changes in output, much like the labor productivity equations.  Therefore, they are also
                                          essentially time trends.
                                                   Hours worked by industry can be obtained by dividing output by productivity.  Then
                                          employment by industry is simply total hours divided by average hours worked per employee.
                                          This yields hours and employment for all industries comprising the private economy.  Public
                                          sector employment, domestic employment and rest of world employment are specified
                                          exogenously.
                                          THE PRICE-INCOME SIDE
                                          Hourly Labor Compensation
                                                   In the price-income side of the model, the wage equations are really the backbone, for labor
                                          compensation comprises the largest share of income, and the most significant contributor to the
                                          core inflation rate is wage inflation.  It is perhaps appropriate that it is here that we introduce the
                                          growth of money into the model, as the long-run determinant of average inflation.
                                                   The wage equations in IdLift are estimated in a stacked system, and the left-hand side variable
                                          is the percent change in the hourly labor compensation in each industry.  An alternative
                                          formulation, used in LIFT, which we plan to test against the current version, is to estimate a
                                          relative wage equation.  In this specification, an equation is estimated for the aggregate wage,
                                          and then the sectoral wage equations are estimated as ratios of the sectoral wage over the
                                          aggregate wage.
                                                   The wage equations are estimated as:
                                                    dw=β pj+β dlp +β supply
                                                            i            1                  2i           i           3i
                                                   where:
                                                                dwi = ln(wag )−ln(wag                                                    ) , and  wag  is the labor compensation rate for industry i
                                                                                                    it                            i,t−1                                   i
                                                                 pj =a five-year weighted average of the percent change in the growth of M2/real GNP
                                                                 supply= ([ pc( p ) − pc( pgnp)] +[ pc( p ) − pc(pgnp)]) /2, the average difference of the rate of
                                                                                                        ag                                                      oil
                                                                                     price change in agriculture and crude petroleum with respect to GNP inflation
                                                                dlp =ln(q /                             ) − ln(q                  /            ) , the percent change in industry labor productivity
                                                                                                  h                                 h, −1
                                                                          i                 it        it                  i, t −1       i t
                                          The stacked system estimation imposes the same coefficient on the  pj variable across all
                                          industries, letting the parameters of the other variables differ by industry.  Although the main
                                          Summary of IdLift                                                                                                            9                                                                                                         Inforum
                motive of introducing the monetary aggregate into this equation is to provide a mechanism
                whereby money affects prices, there is also a rationale supported by anecdotal evidence.  This
                evidence suggests that when the money supply increases more rapidly, it stimulates aggregate
                demand.  This creates pressure in the labor markets, which puts upward pressure on wages.  An
                alternate story is the rational expectations version, that workers bid up wages in expectation of
                the higher inflation which they know will be generated by the money supply growth.
                Profits
                   The profits equations are another very important part of the income side of the model.
                Corporate profits are a large and volatile component of value added by industry.  The equations
                are based on profits as a mark-up over labor compensation, with a response to variables
                representing both demand and cost changes affecting the markup rate.  The data available from
                the Gross Product Originating (GPO) is corporate profits before tax, with no capital consumption
                allowance adjustment, and no inventory valuation adjustment.  For the equations, these two
                variables are added to profits before tax to get a measure that is more of an economic measure of
                costs than a purely accounting measure.  Formally:
                                       CCC
                   Π =CPR +IVA +           i   CCADJ
                     i      i     i  CCCSUM
                   where        Πi = economic profits
                                CPR  = corporate profits before tax
                                    i
                                IVA    = inventory valuation adjustment
                                   i
                                CCC  = corporate capital consumption allowance
                                    i
                                CCCSUM  = aggregate corporate capital consumption allowance
                                CCADJ  = aggregate capital consumption allowance adjustment
                   The ratio in the last term is used because the capital consumption adjustment is not available
                by industry.  The dependent variable in the equations is the ratio of economic profits to labor
                compensation for each industry.
                   Corporate profits depend on both changes in demand and changes in unit costs.  The demand
                effect is measured by bot industry-specific and aggregate measures of demand.  The industry-
                specific variable is the change in output.  The aggregate measure is a measure of the tightness in
                the labor market, the ratio of the natural rate of unemployment to the actual rate of
                unemployment squared.  The input cost variable is the unit intermediate cost per unit of output.
                The general form of the profits equations is:
                     Πi  = f (PCOUT ,PCOUT      ,GNPGAP,NAUNSQ,PCUC ,PCUC          , PCOIL,PCAG)
                    LAB             it       i,t−1                       it      i,t−1
                        i
                   where
                        PCOUT = the percent change in industry output
                        GNPGAP = the GNP gap (         GNP *100 )
                                                     POTGNP
                Summary of IdLift                            10                                      Inforum
                                     NAIRU 2
                        NAUNSQ =  UN  , where NAIRU is the natural rate of unemployment, and UN is the
                                            
                actual rate
                        PCUC = percent change in unit intermediate cost
                        PCOIL = percent change in oil prices
                        PCAG = percent change in agricultural prices
                   Note that not all variables will appear in every equation.  In particular, we will choose either
                the GNPGAP or the NAUNSQ variable, as they are both measures of tightness in the aggregate
                economy.
                Proprietors Income
                   Proprietor income by industry, or noncorporate profits, the returns to entrepreneurs by
                industry.  For the few industries in which proprietors income is large, it appears to be linked to
                the average level of labor compensation.  Many of the equations relate proprietors income to the
                average level of labor compensation over the past three years.  Some additional variables used in
                the other equations are: percent change in GDP, industry change in output, the industry capital-
                output ratio, and the square of the ratio of the natural rate of unemployment to the actual rate.
                Capital Consumption Allowances
                   Capital consumption allowances, or depreciation, comprise a fairly large share of total value
                added.  The IdLift model contains separate sets of equations for corporate and noncorporate
                capital consumption allowances.  Although the capital consumption allowances calculated by the
                BEA differ from accounting measures of depreciation, they still appear to be closely related to a
                capital stock that would be formed by cumulating nominal values of investment.  The equations
                for capital consumption are fairly simple, and for most industries, fit very well.  The explanatory
                variables are nominal stocks of equipment and structures capital.
                Producers’ Prices
                   One way of calculating prices is to forecast value added per unit of output, or value added
                directly, and then calculate prices through the second fundamental input-output identity:
                         p’ = p’A + v
                   An alternative approach is to forecast wages, then forecast prices as markups over wages plus
                intermediate costs, and then determine the sum of the other categories of value added as a
                residual.  Frecasts of profits, proprietors’ income and capital consumption allowances are then
                scaled into consistency with the price forecast.  Both versions of the price income model are
                present in IdLift, and can be switched in or out. The price equations are markup equations, which
                are estimated as:
                    mrkup =β +β gnpgap+β pcgap +β pcgap +β pcq +β pcq +β p +β p
                           it   0    1        t    2       t   3       t−1   4     t   4    t −1  5  ag   6  oil
                   where:
                Summary of IdLift                             11                                      Inforum
                                                                                                                                      p
                                                                         mrkup =                                                           it                             , the ratio of price over unit labor costs plus unit
                                                                                                it        (                /q )+∑                            pw
                                                                                                            lab                                     a
                                                                                                                       it         it                     ij            i
                                                                                                                                               i
                                                intermediate cost
                                                                          gnpgap =as described above
                                                                                                    t
                                                                           pcgap = percent change in GNP gap
                                                                                                t
                                                                           pcqit = percent change in output of commodity i
                                                                           p =agriculture price
                                                                               ag
                                                                           p =crude oil price
                                                                               oil
                                                                           pw=average of domestic and import prices (weighted by import share)
                                                                                    i
                                                          Therefore, both an aggregate variable (GNP gap) and an industry variable (change in output)
                                                are used in explaining price, as well as the raw materials supply price variables, which are
                                                significant in explaining the increase in inflation stemming from major supply shocks.
                                                 The Product-Industry Bridge
                                                          The input-output table and the vectors of final demand expenditures are compiled for the
                                                model at the 97 commodity level.  However, the categories of value added are compiled for 51
                                                industries.  When value added is used to calculate prices using the equation  p'= p'A+v, it must
                                                first be converted to the commodity level, which is basis of the A matrix and the price vector.  If
                                                the price equations are used, or if prices are fixed exogenously, then industry value added must
                                                be modified so as to be consistent with these commodity prices.  For these purposes and others,
                                                we make use of the product to industry bridge.
                                                          The product-industry bridge is derived from the make matrix, which in the case of Idlift has
                                                51 rows (industries) and 97 columns (commodities).  The bridge is stored and updated in flows,
                                                which enables converting in both directions.
                                                          In the base year, which we designate as year 0, the following relationship holds:
                                                                                                 0     V0
                                                                               ∑ g                           ij       =                0 , for all j commodities
                                                                                                i                0         vaaj
                                                                         i∈industry                 ∑Vij
                                                                                                       i
                                                          where:
                                                                          g0 =the total vector sum of 13 categories of value added by industry, including a
                                                                                                discrepancy column, so calculated to that the above relationship holds
                                                                         V0=the product-industry bridge matrix for the base year
                                                                         vaa=the commodity level vector of value added allocated.  In the base year, this is the
                                                                                                vector of value added in the input-output table, which satisfies the fundamental
                                                                                                identities
                                                Summary of IdLift                                                                                                                           12                                                                                                                          Inforum
                                An important concept to grasp is that of real value added weighted output, or revawo.  Denote
                           the ratio          0 /   0 the value-added fraction.  This is the share of total output of commodity j in the
                                           Vij qj
                           base year, accounted for by output produced in industry i.  To transfer output through the bridge,
                           we multiply each output by its value added fraction, and distribute the result to the various
                           industries in their proportion to that commodity in the base year.  The result is revawo, and may
                           be written:
                                                               V0 t
                                        revawot = ∑               ij q
                                                      i           0     j
                                                             j  qj
                                In the years beyond the base year, the V matrix is updated as follows:
                                                         t         t
                                        Vt =V0 qj                gi
                                            ij      ij   0               t
                                                      qj revawoi
                                In this equation  gt is the sum of industry value added plus the value added discrepancy
                                                                  i
                           column.  This equation adjusts the bridge matrix so as to prorate each industry’s value added
                           back to products in accordance with that product’s contributions to the industry  revawo.  To
                           obtain value added by product we then just sum down the column of the updated bridge.
                                If prices are forecast directly, as we are currently doing, we first calculate commodity value
                           added from prices and intermediate cost and price discrepancy:
                                        vaa = p q −∑pwa q −pdisc
                                                j       j   j    i        i   ij  j               j
                                where:
                                         pw=the weighted foreign and domestic price
                                              i      = the price discrepancy, calculated as p’ – p’A – v in the last year of price data
                                         pdisc
                                                    j
                                Next the vaa vector is passed through the bridge in the reverse direction to obtain value added
                           by industry.  Finally, several components of value added are scaled so that total value added by
                           industry is equal to the desired total.  These components are corporate profits, proprietor’s
                           income, and corporate and non-corporate consumption allowances.
                           THE ACCOUNTANT
                                Even if forecasting the prices directly we still need to develop consistent estimates of the
                           other components of income besides labor compenstion.  Rental income, interest income,
                           proprietor’s income and that part of profits paid out as dividends all contribute to personal
                           income.  Corporate profits taxes and indirect business taxes contribute to the revenue of
                           governments.  Capital consumption allowances and retained earnings are part of business
                           savings, which is an important component of national savings.  It is the job of the Accountant to
                           aggregate the components of value added on the price income side and obtain the aggregate
                           variables needed to state the relationships between GNP, national income, personal income and
                           disposable income.  Along the way, the important components of the household and government
                           Summary of IdLift                                                           13                                                                  Inforum
        balance sheets are obtained.  The Accountant also forms aggregates of the expenditure vectors on
        the real side of the model, and forms implicit deflators from current and constant price
        aggregates.
          The operation of the Accountant can be viewed in several stages.  In the first stage, several
        aggregates of income are created from the price-income side, and summed to form nominal
        GNP.  Factor imports are added and factor exports subtracted to obtain GDP.  Supplements to
        labor compensation such as employer contributions are first aggregated across industries and
        then distributed to different funds based on exogenous ratios.  Components of other labor income
        are also calculated in this stage.  The second stage computes capital consumption adjustments,
        and forms proprietor’s income, rental income and profits with and without capital consumption
        adjustments and inventory valuation adjustments.  In the third stage, national income is formed
        by summing labor compensation, proprietor’s income, rental income, corporate profits and
        interest income.  Corporate profits, net interest and contributions for social insurance are
        subtracted, and transfer payments, personal interest income, personal dividend income, and
        business transfer payments are added back in to obtain personal income.  This stage is quite
        lengthy due to a detailed set of identities and regression equations calculating the different
        components of transfer payments and interest payments.  In the fourth stage, the components of
        federal and state and local receipts and expenditures are calculated.  In the fifth and final stage,
        personal taxes and non-tax payments are removed to obtain disposable income.  At this point, the
        loop in the model has been closed, and it returns to the real side, with the new guess at
        disposable income.
        SEVERAL IMPORTANT MACRO EQUATIONS
         The Personal Savings Rate
          This equation has gone through many revisions since the first version of the model.  Common
        variables used were the unemployment rate, usually with a coefficient of close to –1, and the
        share of motor vehicles in personal consumption, also with a coefficient of –1.  The argument for
        using motor vehicles share was that consumers may view purchases of consumer durables
        generally as a substitute for savings. The reason for using the unemployment rate is to introduce
        an automatic stabilizer in the model.
          The current equation is rather simple,
             savrat = β 0+ β1(gnpgap−100)+β2rtb+ β3dummy
          where:
            rtb = the treasury bill rate
            dummy =a dummy variable starting in 1986
          The parameter  β1is constrained to be about .75.  The dummy variable takes the value 1 after
        1986, when a significant decrease in the U.S. personal savings rate was observed.  Despite its
        importance in the structure of the model, the savings rate equation is in trouble.  The U.S. has
        recently seen a personal savings rate become negative.  The economy is very strong now, so this
        would usually be a cause for the savings rate to be higher.  However, there has always been
        Summary of IdLift      14                   Inforum
        something problem of direction of causality in our specification of the savings equation.  In the
        current U.S. situation, something is making consumer spending very strong, and this is both
        stimulative to the economy, as well as resulting in negative measured savings.  It could be the
        wealth effect from the strong stock market, or the price effect of cheap imports, but any of our
        traditional forms of savings rate equation cannot explain the current phenomena.  As soon as the
        savings rate equation rate in the model comes into action, the savings rate jumps up about 7
        points, and therefore, this is a variable which needs to be modified in the first few years of the
        forecast.
        Interest Rate Equations
         Interest rates are important to the expenditure side of the model, in that they affect
        construction and equipment investment, the most cyclical components of expenditure.  Previous
        versions of the model had interest rates in the personal consumption equations as well, and we
        intend to revisit this specification.  Interest rates are also important in the income side of the
        model, where they affect net interest income, and in various other variables, such as interest paid
        by federal and state and local governments, and consumer payments of interest to business.
         The two most important interest rates are the short- and long-term Treasury bill rates.  The
        short-term rate, or 3-month Treasury bill rate, has the following equation:
          rtb = β0 + β1expinf + β 2 grmbase+ β 3(gnpgap[1] −100)+ β 4 funds
         Where:
            expinf = ”Expected” inflation, formed as a three-year average of inflation
            grmbase =Percent change in the real monetary base
            gnpgap[1]−100= Percentage of actual GNP over potential GNP
            funds = The share of equipment investment, structures investment plus the federal deficit
        over GNP
         The expected inflation rate illustrates the Fisher effect, where expected increases in inflation
        tend to get translated into higher nominal interest rates.  The base money growth variable is
        especially effective in predicting interest rates over the last several years.  Since 1990, the
        monetary base has been growing fairly quickly, whereas M2 has been growing slowly.  The GNP
        gap variable is used to pick up cyclical demand effects on interest rates.  The last variable, called
        funds, is intended to capture financial market demand pressure on interest rates.  Higher values
        of this variable indicate a higher demand for finance.  The equation for the long-term Treasury
        bill rate includes the short-term rate, expected inflation, and the  funds variable.  The other
        interest rate variables are the commercial paper rate, the mortgage rate, and the AAA bond rate.
        The first two are regressed directly on the long-term rate, and the bond rate is regressed on the
        long-term rate and the share of profits in GNP.
        Summary of IdLift     15                 Inforum
