                   NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
           RISING MARKUPS AND THE ROLE OF CONSUMER PREFERENCES
                       Hendrik Döpper
                      Alexander MacKay
                       Nathan H. Miller
                        Joel Stiebale
                      Working Paper 32739
                   http://www.nber.org/papers/w32739
               NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                    1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                     Cambridge, MA 02138
                        July 2024
      We thank Chris Conlon, Charlie Murry, Ariel Pakes, and Gloria Sheu for their helpful comments. 
      We  are  grateful  for  the  comments  and  suggestions  from  many  seminar  and  conference 
      participants. Researchers own analyses calculated (or derived) based in part on data from Nielsen 
      Consumer LLC and marketing databases provided through the NielsenIQ Datasets at the Kilts 
      Center for Marketing Data Center at The University of Chicago Booth School of Business. The 
      conclusions drawn from the NielsenIQ data are those of the researcher(s) and do not reflect the 
      views of NielsenIQ. NielsenIQ is not responsible for, had no role in, and was not involved in 
      analyzing and preparing the results reported herein. Computational support and infrastructure 
      were provided by the “Centre for Information and Media Technology” (ZIM) at Heinrich Heine 
      University  Dusseldorf.  Hendrik  Doepper  gratefully  acknowledges  funding  by  the  Deutsche 
      Forschungsgemeinschaft (DFG) (project 235577387/GRK1974). The views expressed herein are 
      those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic 
      Research.
      NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been 
      peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies 
      official NBER publications.
      © 2024 by Hendrik Döpper, Alexander MacKay, Nathan H. Miller, and Joel Stiebale. All rights 
      reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit 
      permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
                Rising Markups and the Role of Consumer Preferences
                Hendrik Döpper, Alexander MacKay, Nathan H. Miller, and Joel Stiebale
                NBER Working Paper No. 32739
                July 2024
                JEL No. D20,D40,L10,L2,L81
                                                            ABSTRACT
                We characterize the evolution of markups for consumer products in the United States from 2006 
                to  2019.  Using  detailed  data  on  prices  and  quantities  for  products  in  more  than  100  distinct 
                product  categories,  we  estimate  flexible  demand  systems  and  recover  markups  under  an 
                assumption that firms set prices to maximize profit. Our empirical strategy obtains a panel of 
                consumer preferences and marginal costs based on the estimation of separate random coefficient 
                models by category and year. We find that markups increased by about 30 percent on average 
                over the sample period. The change is primarily attributable to decreases in marginal costs, as real 
                prices only increased slightly from 2006 to 2019. Our estimates indicate that consumers have 
                become less price sensitive over time.
                Hendrik Döpper                                     Nathan H. Miller
                Düsseldorf Institute for                           McDonough School of Business 
                Competition Economics (DICE)                       Georgetown University
                Heinrich-Heine-Universität Düsseldorf              37th & O Streets NW
                Universitätsstr. 1                                 Washington, DC 20057
                40225 Düsseldorf                                   and NBER
                Germany                                            nhm27@georgetown.edu
                doepper@dice.hhu.de
                                                                   Joel Stiebale
                Alexander MacKay                                   Düsseldorf Institute for 
                Harvard Business School                            Competition Economics (DICE) 
                Morgan Hall 221                                    Heinrich-Heine-Universität Düsseldorf 
                Soldiers Field                                     Universitätsstr. 1
                Boston, MA 02163                                   40225 Düsseldorf
                amackay@hbs.edu                                    Germany
                                                                   stiebale@dice.hhu.de
                An appendix is available at http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w32739
                  1 Introduction
                  Firms with market power set prices that reflect marginal costs, consumer preferences, and
                  the prices of related products. Economic theory indicates that differences between prices and
                  marginal costs—the markups—can have wide-ranging implications for market outcomes. All
                  else equal, an increase in markups transfers wealth from consumers to producers and can cause
                  consumers to change their purchase decisions. These effects lead to less efficient resource allo-
                  cation and, through reduced production, affect the markets for inputs, such as labor. Changes
                  in markups may also affect the long-run dynamics in an industry by distorting investment and
                  innovation incentives (Aghion et al., 2005). Thus, empirical evidence that markups are rising
                  in the United States and abroad (e.g., De Loecker et al., 2020; Ganapati, 2021; De Loecker and
                  Eeckhout, 2021) raises important questions for economic policy.
                      In this paper, we study the markups that arise in the U.S. economy across a large number
                  of firms and products, and examine how supply and demand conditions have influenced firms’
                  pricing decisions over time. Our approach is to estimate models of differentiated-products
                  demand and Nash-Bertrand pricing for more than 100 consumer product categories—such as
                  cereals, shampoo, and over-the-counter cold medications—using data on prices, quantities,
                  and consumer purchasing patterns. The models allow us to recover markups from estimated
                  demand elasticities and first order conditions for profit maximization. We use the models to
                  consider potential mechanisms that contribute to trends in markups, and to connect markups
                  to other economic outcomes, such as consumer surplus and deadweight loss.
                      Wecontribute two main empirical findings to the literature. First, we estimate that average
                  product-level markups increase by about 30 percent between 2006 and 2019. Second, we show
                  that the increase in markups can be explained by a combination of declining marginal costs and
                  a reduction in consumer price sensitivity. We also find that, despite rising markups, the stan-
                  dard measure of consumer surplus for the products in our sample increases over time, though
                  the change in consumer surplus varies across the income distribution. These findings provide
                  additional context for how to interpret changes in markups in the economy more broadly.
                      Our models feature the random coefficients logit demand system that is standard in indus-
                  trial organization (e.g., Berry et al., 1995) and commonly applied in industrial organization to
                  consumer product markets (e.g., Nevo, 2001). The demand system can accommodate flexible
                  patterns of consumer substitution at the product-level. Given demand parameters and data
                  on prices and quantities, one can recover marginal costs, and thus also markups, from the
                  first order conditions that govern price-setting behavior. We do so under the assumption of
                  profit maximization by competing firms. This demand approach to recovering markups allows
                  us to use counterfactual simulations to evaluate how particular mechanisms affect equilibrium
                  outcomes and welfare.1
                     1Our approach is distinct from the production approach (e.g., Hall, 1988; De Loecker and Warzynski, 2012) that
                  uses a cost-minimization assumption to estimate markups without modeling demand or market competition.
                                                                  1
                           We estimate the models using detailed sales information from the Kilts NielsenIQ Retail
                      ScannerData. WeaggregateacrossUPCstoconstructquantitiesandunitizedpricesofproducts
                      (specific brands) for each retail chain, region, and quarter. Data from Capital IQ and Zephyr
                      allows us to identify the parent company of each product in each year, which is important for
                      the supply side of the model. We also use the Kilts NielsenIQ Consumer Panel Data, which
                      contains household-level purchases and demographic information, to help capture differences
                      in product preferences across households and to control for differential selection into the retail
                      chains in our sample by consumers with different demographics.
                           Most previous applications that employ the random coefficients logit demand model focus
                      onasingleproductcategory,suchasready-to-eatcereal(Nevo,2001;Backusetal.,2021),beer
                      (Miller and Weinberg, 2017), or yogurt (Villas-Boas, 2007; Hristakeva, 2022). We implement
                      the methodology separately for each of 133 categories and across the 14 years in our data. We
                      obtain a panel of preference parameters, marginal costs, and markups for individual products
                      across retailers, geographic regions, and periods from 1,862 estimated models.
                           Our empirical strategy has two key components to support flexible estimation at this scale.
                      First, we construct “micro-moments” from the Consumer Panel Data to identify the parame-
                      ters that determine variation in preferences across consumers. Second, we apply the covari-
                      ance restrictions approach of MacKay and Miller (2023) to resolve price endogeneity. Because
                      the covariance restrictions approach requires the joint estimation of supply and demand, the
                      supply-side assumptions can affect the demand estimates. However, these supply-side assump-
                      tions are also necessary to recover markups, so we view it as reasonable to employ them in
                      estimation. Further, joint estimation of supply and demand is often used in the literature be-
                      cause it increases efficiency (e.g., Conlon and Gortmaker, 2020).
                           Ourresults indicate that the average Lerner index, our measure of markups, increases from
                      approximately 0.45 to 0.60 from 2006 to 2019.2 We find that the aggregate trend is driven by
                      changes within products over time, rather than consumer substitution toward higher markup
                      products. Larger absolute increases obtain for products with higher initial markups; however, in
                      percentage terms, the changes that we estimate are similar for high- and low-markup products.
                      Thus, the full distribution of product-level markups shifts upward over time.
                           Within-product markup changes reflect changes in price or marginal cost. We observe that
                      real prices increase by seven percent over 2006 to 2012 but then decrease, such that real prices
                      are only two percent higher in 2019 than in 2006. Thus, marginal cost reductions contribute to
                      rising markups, especially in the later years of the sample. We find that marginal costs decrease
                      at an average annual rate of 2.1 percent. On the demand side, product-specific demand elas-
                      ticities decrease by 30 percent over the sample period. This is primarily driven by a reduction
                      in consumer price sensitivity, which we define as a model primitive that captures the average
                          2The Lerner index is calculated as p−c, where p and c are price and marginal cost, respectively (Lerner, 1934).
                      It typically falls between zero to one.   p
                                                                                   2
                  consumer’s responsiveness to price.3 This demand-side result points to a broad change that
                  affects consumers across the income distribution.
                      Weconductthreeanalysesthatpointtoreductionsinmarginalcostandconsumerpricesen-
                  sitivity as the primary mechanisms that generate rising markups for consumer products. First,
                  in descriptive regressions that isolate cross-category variation in markup trends, we find that
                  changes in marginal cost and consumer price sensitivity have substantially greater explanatory
                  power than other factors, such as changes in consumer demographics and market concentra-
                  tion. Second, we use a counterfactual simulation to compute equilibrium markups that reflect
                  only changes to marginal costs and consumer price sensitivity, while holding all other factors
                  constant. This yields markup trends that closely track our baseline estimates. Finally, we de-
                  velop a novel econometric decomposition that isolates the net contribution to markups of all
                  observable factors, including prices, market shares, product ownership, market concentration,
                  andconsumerpurchasingpatterns. Althoughtheseobservablefactorsexplainmostofthecross-
                  category variation in markups, they do not contribute much to aggregate markup trends.
                      We take initial steps to explain declining consumer price sensitivity. In descriptive regres-
                  sions that exploit cross-category variation in trends, we explore whether changes in price sensi-
                  tivity reflect changes in retail shopping patterns (e.g., involving warehouse clubs, dollar stores,
                  and online shopping) and differences in firm-level marketing and R&D investments. However,
                  these factors do not not explain the changes in consumer price sensitivity that we estimate.
                  Lower price sensitivity might arise instead from an increase in consumers’ opportunity cost of
                  time. In support of this possibility, we provide data that indicate that the use of coupons, which
                  require a small effort by consumers to obtain lower prices, has been declining since the early
                  1990sandfellby50percentoveroursampleperiod. Inaddition,datafromtheAmericanTime
                  Use Survey indicate that the time that consumers spent shopping on consumer products fell by
                  approximately 20 percent during our sample period.
                      With declining costs and changing preference parameters, rising markups could coincide
                  with increases or decreases in consumer welfare. In our application, we find that consumer
                  surplus per capita increased despite rising markups. The changes in consumer surplus vary
                  across the income distribution, with more of the gains accruing to higher-income consumers.
                  Evenso,risingmarkupsareconsequentialforconsumersurplus. Usingacounterfactualsimula-
                  tion, we find that consumer surplus wouldhavebeen18percenthigherin2019ifmarkupswere
                  scaled down to 2006 levels. We use a standard measure of consumer surplus (Small and Rosen,
                  1981) that applies only to the products in our sample, limiting our ability to address overall
                  consumer welfare. Nonetheless, these analyses indicate that market power can have important
                  impacts on allocations across the income distribution and on aggregate welfare—subjects of
                  longstanding interest (e.g., Harberger, 1954).
                     3Consumer price sensitivity can reflect both the strength of brand-specific preferences and the perceived value
                  of lower prices; in the model, less price sensitive consumers require a greater difference in prices to switch to a
                  less-preferred brand.
                                                                   3
                      Ouranalysis is subject to limitations. Due to the scale of the empirical exercise, our demand
                   specification is simpler than specifications employed by some studies that focus on a single
                   productcategory. Weconductaseriesofcomparisonswithestimatesderivedfromthosestudies
                   and various validation checks to show that this limitation is unlikely to drive our estimated
                   markup trends. As one example, for coffee, our estimates of marginal costs move one-for-
                   one with the world commodity price index, and, like Nakamura and Zerom (2010), we find
                   that the commodity price is roughly half of total marginal costs. Overall, our approach yields
                   a reasonable distribution of demand elasticities. Another limitation is that we maintain the
                   assumption of Nash-Bertrand competition throughout. Therefore, we do not identify changes
                                                                                      4
                   in conduct or how they might affect inferences about markups.
                      Ourresearchcontributestoagrowingempiricalliteratureontheevolutionofmarketpower.
                   A seminal contribution is that of De Loecker et al. (2020), which applies the production ap-
                   proach to recover markups of firms that are publicly traded in the United States. A central
                   finding is that average firm-level markups increase significantly from 1980 to 2016, primarily
                   due to a reallocation of revenue toward higher-markup firms. Our research is complementary,
                   as we use a different approach to estimate product-level markups from data on prices and
                   quantities, rather than firm-level markups using data from financial reports. We also find that
                   markups increase, albeit due to within-product changes rather than reallocation.
                      The papers in the literature that are closest to our own are Brand (2021) and Atalay et al.
                   (2023). Bothexaminemarkuptrendsforconsumerproductsusingthedemandapproachunder
                   the assumption of Nash-Bertrand competition, as we do. Brand (2021) considers the hypoth-
                   esis that increases in product variety lead to lower price sensitivity. He estimates demand in
                   nine consumer product categories for the years 2006 and 2017 and finds less elastic demand
                   and higher markups in the latter year. Key distinguishing factors in our analysis include the
                   scope—we consider a broader set of product categories in every year—and our use of individ-
                   ual consumer data to link substitution patterns to variation in demographics. In addition, we
                   address price endogeneity. Atalay et al. (2023) use a sample of 72 product categories from the
                   NielsenIQ Retail Scanner Data and find similar trends in markups and consumer price sensitiv-
                   ity. They apply a different modeling framework that features nested logit demand, and they use
                   Hausmaninstruments to address endogeneity in the price and nesting parameters.5
                      Ourresearchalsoaddstoaliterature that applies the demand approach to recover markups
                   in specific industries over long time horizons. Ganapati (2024) finds that the markups of
                   wholesalers increased over 1992-2012 due to greater scale economies and the expansion of
                     4Although the Nash-Bertrand assumption is widely maintained in the literature, other forms of conduct may also
                   be relevant in consumer product markets (e.g., Miller and Weinberg, 2017).
                     5Berry and Jia (2010) also explore the connection between consumer preferences and markups, in the context of
                   commercial airline markets, and find that an increase in consumer price sensitivity helps explain a (modest) decline
                   in the markups over 1999–2006. This result suggests the caveat that the decreases in price sensitivity that we find
                   for consumerproductsmaynotextendthroughouttheeconomy. Aspricesensitivitycanreflectthestrengthofbrand
                   preferences, it may increase in some sectors even as it decreases in others.
                                                                    4
                   distribution networks, and that consumers were benefiting from lower prices and access to
                   higher quality goods. Grieco et al. (2023) find that the markups of automobile manufacturers
                   decreased over 1980-2018 due to greater competition, despite dramatic increases in product
                   quality and reductions in marginal costs. Miller et al. (2023) show that technology adoption in
                   the cement industry over 1974-2019 increased markups and reduced marginal costs, with price
                   levels changing only modestly. Consistent with our results, these studies highlight the role of
                   cost savings as a determinant of long run economic outcomes.6
                      The paper proceeds as follows: In Section 2, we discuss the demand approach for recover-
                   ing markups and specify the models of demand and supply that we use. Section 3 describes
                   the data, the estimator, and our identifying assumptions. Section 4 summarizes results and
                   explores trends in markups, prices, marginal costs, and consumer price sensitivity over time.
                   It also contains descriptive regressions of markups on possible determinants and catalogs a
                   series of robustness exercises that appear in appendices. Section 5 investigates mechanisms
                   with counterfactual simulations, the econometric decomposition, and possible explanations for
                   changingpricesensitivity. The analysis of consumer surplus and welfare is in Section 6. Section
                   7 concludes. Our appendix materials contain a number of additional robustness analyses and
                   validation exercises.
                   2 ModelingFramework
                   2.1   The DemandApproachtoRecovering Markups
                   Wefollowthedemandapproachtorecovermarkups. Thisapproachisoftenusedwhendataon
                   prices and quantity are available, and it is a staple of the industrial organization literature. The
                   approach invokes the assumption that firms maximize profits and then recovers an estimate
                   for marginal costs that rationalizes observed prices. Take the case of a single-product firm that
                   sets a price, P, given a residual demand schedule, Q(P), and total costs, C(Q). Differentiating
                   its profit function with respect to price and rearranging yields a first order condition for profit
                   maximization of the form:                         ′
                                                              P −C =−1                                              (1)
                                                                 P         ε
                   whereε≡ ∂Q(P) P isthepriceelasticity of demand. The left-hand-side of the equation is the
                                ∂P Q(P)
                   Lerner index, a measure of markups (Lerner, 1934; Elzinga and Mills, 2011). Knowledge of the
                   demandelasticity identifies the Lerner index and the price-over-cost markup (i.e., P/C′). With
                   price data, one also can recover marginal cost and the additive markup (i.e., P − C′).
                      The approach can be employed with more general demand systems that allow for multi-
                   productfirms(e.g.,Berry,1994;Berryetal.,1995)andwithalternativeassumptionsaboutfirm
                     6Miller (2024) reviews these industry studies in greater detail. Also related is Peltzman (2022), who analyzes
                   accounting data on manufacturing firms over 1982-2012 and finds support for rising markups and productivity.
                                                                    5
                  behavior, although the most typical equilibrium concepts are Nash-Bertrand and Nash-Cournot
                  competition. The central idea is to use first-order conditions to infer the (unobserved) marginal
                  costs that rationalize observed prices. With a demand system in hand, welfare statistics such
                  as consumer surplus can be calculated, and it also becomes possible to conduct counterfactual
                  simulations for policy evaluation or an exploration of causal mechanisms.
                      Themainalternative is the so-called production approach that was pioneered in Hall (1986,
                  1988, 1990) and De Loecker and Warzynski (2012), and is applied to the evolution of markups
                  in De Loecker et al. (2020) and De Loecker and Eeckhout (2021). Under an assumption of static
                  cost minimization, the multiplicative markup (i.e., P/C′) equals the product of (i) the elasticity
                  of output with respect to a variable input and (ii) the ratio of revenue to expenditures on the
                  variable input. Thus, firm-level markups can be recovered by estimating output elasticities
                  and then scaling them with accounting data on revenues and expenditures. The production
                  approach does not require prices or marginal costs to be observed.
                      As the demand approach and the production approach differ in their assumptions and data
                  requirements, they may best be viewed as complements (e.g., De Loecker, 2011).7 In apply-
                  ing the demand approach to consumer products, our research builds on the earlier research of
                  De Loecker et al. (2020) and De Loecker and Eeckhout (2021), in that we construct markups
                  at the (much more narrow) level of a product in a specific market. Our estimates are based
                  on observed prices and quantities at this level, instead of firm-level revenue information that
                  aggregates across many products and markets. Implementation comes with its own challenges
                  and limitations. As inferences about markups are linked to the demand elasticities, an identifi-
                  cation strategy is needed to obtain consistent estimates of the demand-side parameters in the
                  presence of price endogeneity. Furthermore, the demand-side approach requires the researcher
                  to specify the structure of the demand system and the nature of competition between firms.
                  2.2    DemandModel
                  For each product category and each year, we apply the random coefficients logit model of
                  Berry et al. (1995). This demand system incorporates product differentiation and consumer
                  heterogeneity, and it has been widely used in the literature to study consumer products. We
                  workwithdatathatareaggregatedtothelevelofaretailchain,quarter,andgeographicregion.
                  As in Backus et al. (2021), we assume that each consumer is affiliated with a single retail chain
                  and geographic region, in the sense that they select among the products sold by one chain in
                  their region. Let there be j = 0,...,Jcrt products available for purchase in chain c, region r,
                  and quarter t, including an outside good (j = 0). Affiliated consumers choose among these
                     7OneworkingpaperimplementsbothapproachesinthecontextoftheU.S.brewingindustry,andfindsthatthey
                  deliver similar results (De Loecker and Scott, 2022).
                                                                   6
                        products. The indirect utility that consumer i receives from a purchase of product j > 0 is
                                                    u       =β∗+α∗p              +ξ +ξ +ξ +∆ξ                     +ϵ                                (2)
                                                      ijcrt      i       i  jcrt     jr      cr     t        jcrt     ijcrt
                        where p         is the retail price, the terms (ξ ,ξ ,ξ ) are product×region, chain×region, and
                                   jcrt                                            jr    cr   t
                        quarter fixed effects, respectively, ∆ξjcrt is a structural error term, and ϵijcrt is a consumer-
                        specific logit error term. A consumer that selects the outside good receives u                                =ϵ       .
                                                                                                                                i0crt     i0crt
                             Weassumethat the consumer-specific coefficients, β∗ and α∗, depend on a set of observed
                                                                                                    i          i
                        and unobserved demographic variables according to
                                                                        α∗ = α+Π D                                                                  (3)
                                                                          i                1   i
                                                                        β∗ = β+Π D +σv                                                              (4)
                                                                          i                2   i       i
                        where D contains the observed demographics and v ∼ N (0,1) contains an unobserved con-
                                    i                                                           i
                        sumer demographic. We demean the observed demographics so that α and β characterize
                        average preferences. In doing so, we use a global mean to preserve variation across regions
                        andtime. Werestrict the unobserved demographics to affect only the constant, rather than also
                        prices, because we find that separately identifying both effects is difficult in practice. Allowing
                        β to be absorbed by the product fixed effects, the structural parameters to be estimated are
                        θ = (α,Π ,Π ,σ).
                                    1    2
                             Because we estimate the model separately for each category-year, all of the structural pa-
                        rameters and fixed effects are allowed to vary freely by product category and year. We omit
                        subscripts for the year and category for notational brevity.
                             Quantity demandedisgivenbyq                     (p    ; θ) = s      (p     ; θ)M     , where s        (·) is the market
                                                                         jcrt   crt          jcrt   crt        crt            jcrt
                        share, p       is a vector of prices, and M             is the “market size” of the chain-region-period. Nevo
                                   crt                                      crt
                        (2000b) provides equations for market shares. We assume that market size—a measure of
                        potential demand—is proportional to the population of the region and the number of stores
                        operated by the chain within the region. Appendix A provides details on this calculation.
                             Our specification accommodates vertical differentiation among the inside goods because
                        higher quality (more expensive) products may attract relatively price-insensitive consumers.
                        This can be an important modeling feature in the context of markup trends, especially to the
                        extent that prices or consumer incomes change over time. Relatedly, incorporating hetero-
                        geneity in price sensitivity allows the model to more reliably capture the curvature of demand
                        (Miravete et al., 2022, 2023). Our specification also incorporates heterogeneity in the utility
                        that consumers receive from the inside goods, which allows for flexible substitution patterns
                        between the inside and outside goods. However, we do not incorporate product characteristics
                        other than price and the fixed effects. Including more product characteristics would allow for
                        the inclusion of random coefficients on these characteristics and yield more flexible cross-price
                        elasticities. Doing so would be difficult to implement at scale because it would require category-
                                                                                       7
                  by-category assessments about which characteristics are appropriate to include and whether or
                  not relevant data are available.
                  2.3   Supply Model
                  Consumer products are produced by manufacturers and sold through retail chains. We as-
                  sumethat each manufacturer sets prices to maximize its profit, taking as given the prices of its
                  competitors and passive cost-plus pricing on the part of retailers. Thus, the retail markup be-
                  comes part of the marginal cost that the manufacturer must pay to sell their products (Gandhi
                  and Nevo, 2021). This assumption is maintained elsewhere (e.g., Miller and Weinberg, 2017;
                  Backus et al., 2021) and is supported by evidence from the empirical literature.8
                      The first order conditions for profit maximization can be expressed in terms of the additive
                  markup:                                                  
                                                                  ∂scrt(p   ) ′ −1
                                         p   −c =− Ω ◦                    crt       s (p )                       (5)
                                          crt    crt        crt      ∂p              crt  crt
                                                                        crt
                  where the vectors pcrt, scrt, and ccrt collect the prices, market shares, and marginal costs of
                  productsj = 1,...,Jcrt, andΩcrt is an “ownership matrix” in which each jth,kth element equals
                  one if products j and k are produced by the same manufacturer, and zero otherwise.
                      Weassumethatmarginal costs are constant in output, following the empirical literature on
                  consumer products (Villas-Boas, 2007; Chevalier et al., 2003; Hendel and Nevo, 2013; Miller
                  and Weinberg, 2017; Backus et al., 2021). We decompose marginal cost according to:
                                                    c    =η +η +η +∆η                                            (6)
                                                     jcrt   jr    cr    t      jcrt
                  where (η ,η ,η ) are product×region, chain×region, and quarter fixed effects, and ∆η            is
                           jr  cr   t                                                                         jcrt
                  a supply-side structural error term. As in our demand specification, all fixed effects can vary
                  freely by product categoryandyearbecauseweestimateseparatemodelsforeachcategory-year
                  combination. Thus, our model allows for changes in brand-specific technologies over time, and,
                  onanannualfrequency,thesechangesmaybecorrelatedwithchangesindemand(e.g.,aplant
                  closure). The supply-side structural error term reflects unobserved shocks to costs, including
                  those due to “cost shifters” that have been used elsewhere in the literature as instruments
                  in demand estimation, such as materials costs and distribution costs that affect products and
                  chains differentially.
                      Given estimates of demand parameters, knowledge of product ownership, and observed
                  values of prices and shares, we can construct the first-order conditions represented by equation
                     8De Loecker and Scott (2022) find evidence for perfect wholesale-retail pass-through indicating competitive
                  retail markets. There is also evidence that retail prices respond to cost shocks (Butters et al., 2022) but not shocks to
                  retailer demand (Arcidiacono et al., 2020). Finally, evidence suggests that retail markups have been relatively stable
                  over the period 1980-2014, despite large changes in demand (Anderson et al., 2023). Our modeling assumptions
                  are also consistent with nonlinear contracts that specify slotting fees or other fixed transfers.
                                                                  8
                  (5) and recover unobserved marginal costs (cjcrt). We use these values to obtain product-level
                                                     p   −c
                  markups, which we calculate as jcrt      jcrt (the Lerner index).
                                                        p
                                                         jcrt
                  3 DataandEmpiricalStrategy
                  3.1    Data
                  Our primary sources of data are the Retail Scanner Data and Consumer Panel Data of Kilts
                  NielsenIQ, which span the years 2006–2019. The scanner data contain unit sales and revenue
                  at the level of the universal product code (UPC), store, and week from a sample of retail chains.
                  The consumer panel data contain the purchases of a sample of panelists by UPC code, retailer,
                  and day, along with demographic information on the panelists. We use aggregation and a
                  numberofscreens to construct samples that are suitable for the empirical model.
                      WetakeasgiventhatconsumerschoosebetweentheproductsthataregroupedbyNielsenIQ
                  into the same product category (or “module”). The categories contain UPCs that are likely
                  substitutes. Our baseline sample comprises 133 product categories that cover 55 percent of
                  revenues in the Retail Scanner Data. We obtain these categories by first identifying the top
                  200 categories by revenue. These categories account for 74 percent of revenues in the Retail
                  Scanner Data. Within these 200 categories, we apply a screen to select those with relatively
                  modest product differentiation—the ones that the model can reasonably be expected to fit.
                  The screen removes categories for which the 99th percentile of unit prices is greater than five
                  times the median unit price. An example of an omitted category is “Batteries,” which has some
                  products that are reasonably close substitutes, such as various brands of AAA batteries, along
                  with other products that are functionally quite different, such as D batteries.
                      Within these categories, we define products at the brand level, which consolidates thou-
                  sands of UPC codes into a more manageable set. Brands are defined by NielsenIQ and are fairly
                  narrow. For example, in ready-to-eat cereals, “Cheerios,” “Honey Nut Cheerios,” and “Multi-
                  grain Cheerios” are three distinct brands. Within a brand, we aggregate sales across UPCs by
                  unit of measurement, which characterizes volume (e.g., liters), mass (e.g., ounces), or count
                                                                 9
                  (e.g., six-pack), depending on the category.      We measure price using the ratio of revenue to
                  equivalent unit sales, following the standard practice to adjust for differences in package size
                  (e.g., Nevo, 2001; Miller and Weinberg, 2017; Backus et al., 2021). Within each category, we
                  treat the top 20 brands by revenue as distinct products, and we collapse the remaining brands
                  into a single composite “fringe” product that we assume is priced by an independent firm. The
                  top 20 brands within each category account for approximately 84 percent of category revenues
                  andtypicallyincludeaprivatelabelproduct. Theaveragemarketshareofprivatelabelproducts
                     9In a handful of categories, UPCs differ in terms of whether units are reported in terms of volume, mass, or count.
                  For those, we include only UPCs associated with the type of measurement that accounts for the greatest revenue.
                                                                    9
                                                           Table 1: Sample of Product Categories
                                                                              evenue    Retailer-DMA       Brands           Share          Share
                                                                             R
                        Rank    Product Category           Observations   ($ Millions)  Combinations   Per Market   Top 20 Brands   Private Label
                            1   Cereal - Ready To Eat          231,178        22,557             333         19.3            0.58           0.08
                            2   Candy - Chocolate              229,065        16,162             335         18.9            0.54           0.03
                            3   Candy - Non-Chocolate          225,336         9,420             334         18.6            0.61           0.14
                            4   Deodorants - Personal          221,618         7,186             333         18.3            0.79           0.00
                            5   Soap - Specialty               214,153         5,563             355         17.5            0.68           0.05
                            6   Tooth Cleaners                 212,056         7,343             333         17.6            0.71           0.00
                            7   Shampoo-Liquid/Powder          202,923         7,490             332         16.8            0.65           0.04
                            8   Cookies                        202,880        17,191             334         16.8            0.64           0.18
                            9   Sanitary Napkins               201,864         5,128             333         16.7            0.79           0.18
                           10   Cold Remedies - Adult          201,134         9,111             332         16.6            0.85           0.40
                           20   Bottled Water                  160,454        23,333             335         13.2            0.90           0.38
                           40   Baby Formula                   133,082        10,616             323         12.1            0.76           0.05
                           60   Nuts - Bags                    107,314         6,500             334          8.9            0.79           0.24
                           80   Fresh Muffins                   85,228         3,899             332          7.6            0.85           0.17
                         100    Tuna - Shelf Stable             68,711         4,099             332          5.7            0.98           0.13
                         120    Cream-Refrigerated              52,297         3,402             330          4.6            0.70           0.30
                         130    Frozen Poultry                  33,428         2,145             300          3.9            0.86           0.27
                         133    Fresh Mushrooms                 25,510         2,772             246          3.4            0.95           0.28
                                MeanValues                     108,442         6,766             319          9.8            0.84           0.16
                       Notes: This table shows summary statistics for a selection of product categories. The chosen categories are sorted by
                       the number observations in the estimation sample and are indexed by rank. Revenue provides total sales in millions
                       of US $ (deflated to 2010 Q1) from 2006 to 2019. The two groups are separated by a horizontal rule. Statistics
                       are calculated after the data cleaning steps described in the text. The last three columns report raw means across
                       retailer-DMA-year-quarter markets. Shares in this table reflect inside shares (i.e., excluding the outside good).
                       across categories is about 16 percent and it has no meaningful trend over time.10
                           Weusethedesignatedmarketareas(DMAs)intheNielsenIQdataasthegeographicregions.
                       We restrict attention to the 22 DMAs for which there are at least 500 panelists in every year
                       in the consumer panel data. These DMAs account for about half of the total revenue observed
                       in the scanner data. Within each DMA, we aggregate the store-level data up to the level of
                       the retail chain, as many retail chains set common prices among nearby stores (DellaVigna
                       and Gentzkow, 2019). Finally, we aggregate the week-level data up to the level of quarters,
                       following Miller and Weinberg (2017). The average number of retail chains per region is 9.3,
                       and the average number of products per category, retail chain, and region is 10.3.11
                           Table 1 provides summary statistics for a selection of product categories in the estimation
                       sample sorted by number of observations. We observe more products in the RTE Cereals cate-
                       gory than in any other product category. Among the chains and DMAs in the baseline sample,
                       the RTE Cereals category generated more than $22 billion in revenue over 2006-2019. The
                       category for which we observe the fewest products is Fresh Mushrooms.
                           Weuse household demographic data to account for differences in the composition of con-
                       sumers across markets and changes within markets over time. We generate consumer-specific
                       demographic draws by sampling 5,000 consumers from the Consumer Panel Data for each re-
                         10See Figure A.1 for the distribution of private label market shares across categories and their evolution over time.
                         11For additional details about the data, see Appendix A.
                                                                                   10
                                 12
                  gion and year.     We sample with replacement and use the projection weights provided by
                  NielsenIQ. We focus on two demographics that we expect to influence demand for many of the
                  consumerproductsinthedata: householdincomeandanindicatorforthepresenceofchildren
                  in the household. We assume that log of income is what enters demand through equations (3)
                  and (4). We demean the demographics prior to estimation using a global mean, so that varia-
                  tion over time and across markets remains. We also divide the income measure by its standard
                  deviation. The unobserved demographic is drawn from a standard normal distribution that is
                  independent from the observed demographics.
                      WealsousetheConsumerPanelDatatoconstruct“micro-moments”thatidentifythedemo-
                  graphic parameters. Specifically, we calculate the average values of the observed demographics
                  for consumers that purchase each product in a given region and year, again using the projec-
                  tion weights. In estimation, we search for preference parameters that generate corresponding
                  patterns in the model. Thus, our approach attempts to ensure that, for example, the average
                  incomeofhouseholdsthatpurchasedHoneyNutCheeriosinChicagoin2015matchesthedata.
                  When constructing the micro-moments, we use only reported purchases from mass merchan-
                  disers, grocery stores, and drug stores, and we drop purchases from the largest chains that are
                  not in the Retail Scanner Data. We make these restrictions to match better the distribution of
                  retailers in the Retail Scanner Data, which is disproportionately selected from the aforemen-
                  tioned three channels. Note that we do not restrict our sample of demographic draws based
                  on which retailers the consumers purchase from, so the micro-moments allow us to pin down
                  differences in consumer tendencies to purchase from the retailers in our data (captured by β∗).
                                                                                                                 i
                      Weaccount for multi-product ownership using auxiliary data, as ownership information is
                  notprovidedintheNielsenIQdatabases. Westartwithamanualsearchinwhichweidentifythe
                  company that owns each product. Because multiple company names could be associated with
                  the same manufacturer when a conglomerate has multiple subsidiary companies, we use data
                  from Capital IQ to obtain the ultimate parent company for each product. This process provides
                  a snapshot of product ownership at the end of our sample period. We backcast ownership for
                  the preceding years using information on mergers and acquisitions (M&A) from the Zephyr
                  database, compiled by Bureau van Dijk. Compared with most other M&A databases, Zephyr
                  has the advantage that there is no minimum deal value for a transaction to be included. We
                  assume that prices are chosen to maximize the profit of the ultimate parent company within
                  each category. Finally, we match our sample with firm-level financial data from Compustat
                  to obtain information on marketing expenditures and R&D. We use these variables to explain
                  variation in price sensitivities across brands and time.13 As Compustat covers only publicly-
                  traded firms, this information is available for about half of the observations in our sample.
                    12We do not sample at the chain-region-year level because the decision to purchase from a chain is endogenous
                  in our model. Our approach does not allow for, e.g., within-region geographic patterns that would shift the demo-
                  graphics of potential shoppers for each chain.
                    13The analyses appear in Appendix F.3.
                                                                  11
                      We deflate prices and incomes using the Consumer Price Index such that they are in real
                  dollars as of the first quarter of 2010.14
                  3.2   Estimation and Identification
                  Weestimatethemodelusingthegeneralizedmethodofmoments(GMM).Weestimateseparate
                  models for each category and year, and allow the parameters for estimation, θ = (α,Π ,Π ,σ),
                                                                                                           1   2
                  to vary arbitrarily across the models. The GMM estimator for θ is:
                                          ˆ               ′                    " gMM(θ) #
                                          θ = argming(θ) Wg(θ),         g(θ) =     CR                            (7)
                                                   θ                              g   (θ)
                  whereW isaweightingmatrix,gMM(θ)collectsmicro-momentsthatsummarizeshowwellthe
                  modelmatchesthecorrelations between demographics and product purchases that we observe
                  in the NielsenIQ Panelist dataset, and gCR(θ) assesses a covariance restriction between demand-
                  side and cost-side structural error terms. We take a two-step approach to estimation in which
                  wefirst estimate θ2 = (Π1,Π2,σ) then estimate the price parameter, α (see Appendix B). This
                  reflects that micro-moments identify θ2 but not α (Berry et al., 2004; Berry and Haile, 2022),
                  and that the covariance restriction identifies α conditional on θ2 (MacKay and Miller, 2023).
                      For the micro-moments, we use variation in purchase patterns across products and regions
                  to capture heterogeneity in preferences. Each element corresponding to product j and demo-
                  graphic k is given by
                                                       1 XP ωs           (θ)D            
                                            MM                    i i ijcrt    ik
                                           g    (θ) =            P                −Mjrk                          (8)
                                            jk        T              ωs (θ)
                                                        j c,r,t     i i jcrt
                  where T is the number of chain-region-quarter combinations in which product j is sold, ω is
                           j                                                                                     i
                  the weight that we place on consumer i, s        (θ) is the consumer-specific choice probability
                                                               ijcrt
                  implied by the candidate parameter vector, and Mjrk is the mean demographic observed in the
                  data for product and region. That is, we match the implied average demographic of consumers
                  for each product-chain-region-quarter to the average demographic observed in the data for the
                  corresponding product-region (allowing for differences across years and categories). In our
                  baseline specification, we use two observed demographic variables and at most 21 products, so
                  there can be up to 42 micro-moments.
                      The covariance restriction is that the demand-side and supply-side structural error terms
                  are uncorrelated in expectation: E[∆ξjcrt∆ηjcrt] = 0. This provides a moment that we use in
                  estimation to identify the price parameter. We construct the empirical analog of the moment as
                    14We deflate using the Consumer Price Index for All Urban Consumers: All Items Less Food and Energy in U.S.
                  City Average. This CPI measure is predominantly constructed from products and services outside of the categories
                  in our sample. The inflation data are monthly and seasonally adjusted.
                                                                  12
                   follows:                                     X
                                                    CR        1              ′
                                                   g   (θ) = T      ∆ξcrt(θ) ∆ηcrt(θ)                               (9)
                                                                c,r,t
                   wherethe∆ξcrt(θ)and∆ηcrt(θ)termsarerecoveredforeachcandidateθ,andT isthenumber
                   of chain-region-quarter-product combinations for a given year.
                      Our identification strategy is well-suited for estimation at scale. The primary alternative
                   would be an instrumental variables approach. However, many of the instruments used in the
                   literature require data on non-price product characteristics to construct markup-shifters (e.g.,
                   Berry et al., 1995; Gandhi and Houde, 2020) or cost-shifters (e.g., Backus et al., 2021). Fur-
                   thermore, instruments require a “first-stage” relevance conditions to be satisfied, and there is
                   noguaranteethattheinstrumentswouldberelevantforeverycategory. Bycontrast, the micro-
                   moments and covariance restriction do not require data on non-price product characteristics,
                   and there is no equivalent relevance condition that must be satisfied.
                      As we have specified the model, the supply-side structural error term (∆η           ) reflects all
                                                                                                       jcrt
                   residual variation in costs, including factors that correspond to observed instruments. For ex-
                   ample, variation in ∆η       will capture product-specific shipping costs (Miller and Weinberg,
                                           jcrt
                   2017) and prices of product-specific ingredients (Backus et al., 2021), even though these are
                   not observed directly in our approach. When most of the variation in ∆ηjcrt is due to such
                   factors, similar economic reasoning can be used to justify the assumption E[∆ξjcrt∆ηjcrt] = 0
                   as one would use for E[∆ξ      z    ] = 0, where z     is a vector of cost-shifter instruments.15
                                               jcrt jcrt              jcrt
                      Weabsorbpotentially confounding sources of variation by incorporating fixed effects at the
                   product×region, chain×region, and quarter levels (all of which are estimated separately by
                   year and category). For example, the fixed effects control for the possibility that higher-quality
                   products are more expensive to produce. Nonetheless, some threats to validity remain. As a
                   leading example, if firms’ marginal costs vary with output, then demand shocks would shift
                   marginal costs, and the covariance restriction would be violated. Correlated shifts in quality
                   and marginal cost that occur within a year also could be problematic. Alternatively, if retailers
                   run non-price promotions when they have excess product inventory, this may boost demand for
                   unobservable reasons, precisely when opportunity costs are low.
                      Wefindthat our model and identification strategy deliver a reasonable distribution of own-
                   price elasticities, which we report in Appendix Figure D.2. This is an indicator of the potential of
                   our empirical strategy, as demand elasticities are theoretically linked to markups and marginal
                   costs in our model. We also find that our demand estimates are consistent with the literature,
                   for a few categories where comparisons are possible (see Appendix C).
                      We consider the robustness of our results to model specification along a few important
                   dimensions. First, we consider the role of the consumer heterogeneity pararameters in our
                   model, which are identified by micro-moments constructed from the Consumer Panel data. In
                     15See MacKay and Miller (2023) for a more detailed discussion and additional examples.
                                                                    13
                  Appendix D.1, we estimate an alternative standard logit demand model (Π = 0, Π = 0,
                                                                                                    1         2
                  σ = 0) for all categories and years. Relative to the logit specification, our baseline estimates
                  obtain more elastic demand estimates and smaller markups.
                      Next, we consider the omission of product characteristics from the model. First, as noted
                  above, we obtain elasticities and margins that are similar to the literature in other categories.
                  This provides some evidence that product characteristics may not be critical for pinning down
                            16
                  markups.     Aparticular example is Backus et al. (2021), who use similar data and assumptions
                  in their analysis of ready-to-eat cereal but include product characteristics. To address this
                  further, we construct product characteristics for ready-to-eat cereals following the approach of
                  Backus et al. (2021). We include these characteristics in an alternative set of estimates as a
                  specification check, and we report the results in Appendix D.2. Our estimates for this category
                  are not materially affected by the inclusion of additional characteristics.
                      Finally, we consider alternative identification strategies for the price parameter. Relative to
                  the covariance restriction approach, using Hausman instruments or assuming that prices are ex-
                  ogenous yield results that are less plausible. With the covariance restriction, demand is always
                  downward-sloping, and the median own-price elasticities are larger than one in magnitude for
                  95 percent of the category-year combinations. Thus, in our baseline model, demand is elastic
                  at most observed prices, consistent with profit maximization by firms with positive marginal
                  costs. By contrast, assuming prices are exogenous or using Hausman instruments produces
                  median own-price elasticities greater than one for only 71 and 66 percent of the category-year
                  combinations, respectively, and demand is upward-sloping in several cases.
                  4 TheEvolution of Markups in Consumer Products
                  In this section, we document the evolution of markups over the sample period. We first sum-
                  marize median category-level markups and the overall distribution of markups. We then disen-
                  tangle within-product variation from across-product variation, and decompose markup changes
                  into price and marginal cost changes. We also consider how demand for consumer products
                  changes over time, and examine the economic forces that correlate with markup changes.
                  4.1    Aggregate Markup Trends
                  Our estimation procedure yields a panel of 14.4 million product-level observations across 133
                  categoriesand14years. Toevaluateaggregatetrends,wefirstconsiderchangesinthecategory-
                  level markupsinthe1,862category-yearcombinationsinourdata. Wetakethemedianmarkup
                  withineachcategory-year,andwethencalculatethemeanacrosscategoriesineachyear. Figure
                    16Incorporating product characteristics can allow for richer patterns of horizontal differentiation, which can yield
                  moreaccurate counterfactual simulations that depend on specific cross-price elasticities, such as merger simulation
                  (e.g., Nevo, 2000a) or studies of entry and exit (e.g., Ciliberto et al., 2021).
                                                                   14
                                                                      Figure 1: Markups Over Time Across Product Categories
                                                                       0.7
                                                                      0.65
                                                                                                                                                                  l
                                                                       0.6                                                                         l                     l      l
                                                                    ner                                                                                   l
                                                                                                                                            l
                                                                                                                                    l
                                                                      0.55                                                   l
                                                                                                       l      l
                                                                    Median Ler0.5               l                     l
                                                                                        l
                                                                      0.45       l
                                                                       0.4
                                                                              2006           2008           2010          2012           2014           2016          2018
                                 Notes: This figure plots the mean of within-category median markups over time. Markups are defined by the Lerner
                                 index, (p − mc)/p, and are estimated separately by product category and year. When calculating the mean, we
                                 winsorize the upper and lower 2.5 percent of observations across all categories and years.
                                 1 plots this statistic over time. Averaging across categories, we find an increase in the median
                                 Lerner index from approximately 0.45 in 2006 to over 0.60 towards the end of our sample
                                 period. This corresponds to an average annual growth rate in markups of 2.3 percent.
                                        In addition to the median, we find that the full distribution of within-category markups is
                                 shifting upward over time. Appendix Figure G.1 reports the trends for different percentiles
                                 of the markup distribution. We regress different percentiles of the within-category markup
                                 distribution on year dummies and report the resulting coefficients in panel (a). These can be
                                 interpreted as changes in markups relative to 2006, the first year of our sample. In panel (b),
                                                                                                                                                       p−c 17
                                 we repeat the exercise with the log of the Lerner index, ln( p ).                                                                     Panel (a) shows that the
                                 level increase in markups is slightly higher for the upper half of the distribution, while panel
                                 (b) indicates that the relative increase in markups is in fact quite similar across the distribution.
                                 These results suggest that the aggregate trends in markups in our sample are not isolated to a
                                 subset of products or firms, but rather reflect a broader trend affecting overall categories.
                                 4.2         Within-Product Changes in Markups, Prices, and Marginal Costs
                                 Different economic effects could account for an upward shift in the distribution of markups.
                                 Firms could be charging higher markups on existing products, or replacing lower-markup prod-
                                 ucts with newer, higher-markup products. Further, an increasing markup distribution could
                                 reflect higher prices, lower marginal costs, or both, or it could reflect a reallocation of market
                                 share from lower-markup products to higher-markup products.
                                        Toevaluatethesepossibilities, weanalyzethechangeinmarkups,prices,andmarginalcosts
                                 at the product level. For markups, we regress the log of the Lerner index on quarter, year, and
                                     17We find similar changes in the distribution of firm-level markups which we calculate as quantity-weighted
                                 averages over brands owned by each parent company.
                                                                                                                          15
                                                               Figure 2: Product-Level Changes in Markups, Prices, and Marginal Costs
                                                                                                                                   (a) Markups
                                                                                                  0.4
                                                                                                                                                                                l      l
                                                                                                 kups0.3                                                                                     l
                                                                                                                                                                    l
                                                                                                                                                                          l
                                                                                                  0.2                                                        l
                                                                                                                                                       l
                                                                                                                              l                  l
                                                                                                                                    l
                                                                                                  0.1                   l                  l
                                                                                                 Change in Mar    l
                                                                                                     0     l
                                                                                                         2006        2008         2010        2012         2014        2016         2018
                                                                               (b) Prices                                                                                           (c) Marginal Costs
                                             0.15
                                                                                                                                                           0.1
                                               0.1
                                                                                                                                                             0      l
                                          ices                                                                                                                                                     l
                                                                                      l     l                                                                             l
                                                                    l                             l     l     l                                                                 l
                                             0.05                         l
                                                                                l                                                                        −0.1                               l            l
                                                                                                                    l                                                                 l
                                                              l                                                           l     l     l                                                                        l
                                                        l                                                                                                −0.2                                                        l
                                                 0                                                                                                                                                                         l
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 l
                                                                                                                                                         −0.3                                                                                       l
                                          Change in Pr−0.05                                                                                                                                                                            l      l
                                                                                                                                                        Change in Marginal Costs−0.4
                                             −0.1
                                                     2006        2008        2010        2012        2014        2016        2018                                2006        2008         2010        2012        2014         2016        2018
                                      Notes: This figure shows coefficients and 95 percent confidence intervals of a regressions of the log of the Lerner
                                      index, real prices, and real marginal costs at the product-chain-DMA-quarter-year level on year dummies controlling
                                      for product-chain-DMA and quarter fixed effects. The year 2006 is the base category.
                                      product-chain-region fixed effects, using revenues as weights.18 The unit of observation is a
                                      unique product-chain-region-quarter-year combination. The results of this regression are docu-
                                      mentedinpanel (a) of Figure 2. The figure displays point estimates and 95 percent confidence
                                      intervals for the year fixed effects. The results indicate a within-product increase in markups of
                                      about30percentbetween2006and2019. Theestimatedannualgrowthrateofwithin-product
                                      markups is 2.2 percent per year. Thus, we find that the shift in the distribution of markups can
                                      be explained by changes within products over time.
                                              We find similar results if we use unweighted regressions or if we use a balanced panel of
                                      products. Together, these results indicate that the estimated trend is not driven by product
                                      entry and exit or a reallocation of market shares across products. We report the full regres-
                                      sion results and these alternative specifications in Tables G.1, G.2, and G.3 in the Appendix.
                                      We also consider alternative specifications in which we replace year fixed effects with a lin-
                                      ear time trend, drop product-chain-DMA fixed effects, or use category fixed effects. We obtain
                                      qualitatively similar results across these specifications, and estimate average yearly increases
                                      in markups between 1.7 and 2.2 percent. We estimate larger changes when controlling for
                                      product-level fixed effects, indicating that within-product changes are greater than the aggre-
                                           18We weight by revenues instead of quantities to assign higher weights to products with higher initial prices.
                                      Revenue-weighted relative changes, which we measure by changes in log markups, are consistent with quantity-
                                      weighted absolute changes in a consumption basket.
                                                                                                                                             16
                  gate (revenue-weighted) changes in markups. Though these differences are not substantial,
                  they suggest that some of the product-level increase in markups may be offset by the introduc-
                  tion of lower-markup products over time.
                      Mechanically, within-product markup changes must be driven by price changes, marginal
                  cost changes, or both. To explore, we regress log prices and log marginal costs on product-
                  DMA-retailer, quarter, and year fixed effects. Prices and marginal costs are deflated by core
                  CPI and indexed to Q1 of 2010. The yearly coefficients are documented in panels (b) and (c)
                  of Figure 2. Panel (b) shows that prices increase at the beginning of our sample period, but
                  decline in later years. The average price for products in our sample increases by 7 percent over
                  2006to2012,butprices are only 2 percent higher in 2019 than in 2006.
                      Panel (c) of the figure reports the yearly coefficients for log marginal costs. The results
                  indicate a within-product decrease in marginal costs of about 30 percent between 2006 and
                  2019. This corresponds to a decline of 2.1 percent per year on average. Our point estimates
                  suggest that marginal costs increased between 2010–2011, though there is some noise and a
                  linear trend cannot be rejected. Thus, higher real prices account for part of the increase in
                  markups during the first half of our sample, while the higher markups we observe at the end
                  of our sample arise primarily from lower real marginal costs. In nominal (i.e., non-deflated)
                  terms, marginal costs are roughly constant over time. See Appendix Figure G.2.
                      The extent to which marginal cost reductions lead to higher markups, in a causal sense,
                  depends on equilibrium pass-through relationships and cannot be ascertained solely from the
                  trends shown in Figure 2. For example, perhaps prices would have fallen with marginal costs,
                  if not for changes in demand or other factors such as concentration. This motivates a number
                  of empirical exercises later in the paper that investigate causal mechanisms.
                      However, the marginal cost reductions that we estimate are economically significant on
                  their own.   In many markets, costs may decline over time due to innovations in produc-
                                                                              19
                  tion/distribution technology and operational efficiencies.      We observe that, for consumer
                  products, manufacturers sought ways to reduce costs over the sample period. Procter & Gam-
                  ble, one of the largest companies in our data, began a “productivity and cost savings plan” in
                  2012 that was estimated to reduce annual costs by $3.6 billion in 2019. Similarly, Unilever
                  reports realizing e6 billion in cost savings over 2017-2019.20 Overall, our finding of declines
                  in marginal costs is consistent with secular increases in productivity across the economy.
                  4.3   Changes in Demand
                  We now examine the changes in demand that are captured by our empirical model. We start
                  with own-price elasticities of demand because these are linked to markups theoretically. We
                    19For one comparison, Grieco et al. (2023) estimate that marginal costs of automobile manufacturers decrease by
                  1.4 percent per year on average over 1980-2018, conditional on vehicle attributes.
                    20See the 2019 Annual Reports of Procter & Gamble Company and Unilever.
                                                                 17
                  regress the logarithm of the absolute value of own-price elasticity at the product level on quar-
                  ter, year, and product-chain-region fixed effects, as before. We present the results in panel (a)
                  of Figure 3. The coefficients show that price elasticities decline in magnitude, indicating that
                  demand becomes less responsive to prices over time. Price elasticities can be influenced by
                  the level of prices, several underlying aspects of consumer preferences, and supply-side factors
                  such as quality and competition that contribute to the shape of residual demand curves.
                      Wefindthat the time-series variation in price elasticities is highly correlated with the mean
                  price coefficient, α, which we estimate separately for each category and year. We repeat the
                  regression exercise using price sensitivity, which we define as the log absolute value of the
                  mean price coefficient (i.e., log(−α)), as the dependent variable. Panel (b) shows a decline in
                  price sensitivity. The decreases are large through 2012, corresponding with the initial increase
                  in prices that we observe. In the model, changes to α reflect changes that are common to all
                  consumers, as the model controls for factors such as changing consumer demographics and
                  selection by consumers into retailers and products.
                      While changes in the elasticity may be driven by vertical or horizontal shifts in demand or
                  movementalongthedemandcurve,thechangesthatarecapturedbyαreflectarotationinthe
                  demand curve. A demand rotation that decreases price sensitivity manifests in the data as a
                  reducedwithin-marketratioofthevarianceinquantitiesoverthevarianceinprices. Weobserve
                  that this ratio of variances is falling, driven primarily by a decrease in within-market share
                  dispersion (while within-market price dispersion increases slightly). Intuitively, this pattern
                  indicates that demand is becoming less sensitive to price variation. The covariance restriction
                  approach to estimation exploits this empirical pattern to identify changes in price sensitivity.
                  See MacKay and Miller (2023) for additional details.21
                      Our estimates allow us to examine other changes in demand as well. For instance, the
                  fixed effects allow us to characterize changes in perceived product quality over time, rela-
                  tive to that provided by the outside good. We measure product quality as the value that an
                  average consumer obtains from the product (relative to the outside good); to improve compa-
                  rability across categories we standardize values using the category-level means and standard
                  deviations. Figure G.3 in the Appendix shows that perceived product quality declines over the
                                 22
                  sample period.    Improvements in the outside good—which includes shopping through online
                  retailers for example—could contribute to this trend. The same appendix figure plots changes
                  in the coefficients that characterize how observed consumer demographics affect the consumer-
                  specific price coefficient and category-level constant (Π ,Π ). Changes in these parameters can
                                                                          1   2
                  also affect substitution to the outside good, relative to substitution among products within a
                    21This change can be also captured by alternative approaches, even those that are known to deliver biased elas-
                  ticities. A rotation in demand affects the shape of the price-quantity cloud, which will, for example, affect even a
                  linear ordinary least squares coefficient. In Appendix D.4, we examine trends under the alternative identification
                  assumption that prices are exogenous.
                    22A similar but slightly smaller trend is obtained when we scale quality by the estimated price coefficients.
                                                                 18
                                                                                                               Figure 3: Changes in Demand
                                                              (a) Log Absolute Elasticity                                                                                          (b) Price Sensitivity
                                             0.1                                                                                                           0.1
                                               0      l                                                                                                      0      l
                                                            l
                                           −0.1                   l                  l                                                                   −0.1             l
                                                                               l                                                                                                l
                                                                        l                  l
                                           −0.2                                                  l                                                      ice Sensitivity−0.2                 l      l
                                                                                                       l                                                                              l
                                                                                                                    l
                                                                                                             l                                                                                           l
                                           −0.3                                                                                       l                  −0.3                                                  l
                                                                                                                          l     l                                                                                    l           l                  l
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       l      l
                                          Change in Elasticity−0.4                                                                                       −0.4                                                              l
                                           −0.5                                                                                                         Change in Pr−0.5
                                                   2006         2008        2010        2012         2014        2016        2018                                2006        2008         2010        2012        2014         2016        2018
                                      Notes: This figure shows coefficients and 95 percent confidence intervals of a regression of log absolute elasticity and
                                      price sensitivity at the product-chain-DMA-quarter-year level on year dummies controlling for product-chain-DMA
                                      and quarter fixed effects. The year 2006 is the base category.
                                      market. In Appendix Figure G.4, we report trends in market elasticities and diversion ratios.
                                      4.4           Descriptive Analysis
                                      Thus far, we have shown that within-product markups increase over the sample period and
                                      that, from a mechanical perspective, the change is primarily driven by marginal cost decreases,
                                      at least by the end of the sample. We also have shown that consumer price sensitivity and
                                      perceived product quality (relative to the outside good) decrease over the sample period. In
                                      our model, each of these factors—marginal cost, price sensitivity, and product quality—affect
                                      equilibrium markups. Consumer demographics and competitive events, such as mergers and
                                      product entry, also matter for equilibrium markups.
                                              In this section, we take initial steps to identify why markups increase, exploiting the unique
                                      panel structure of our data. Our approach uses descriptive regressions to identify how changes
                                      in different market factors correlate with changes in markups. We use fixed effects to absorb
                                      the straight-forward time-series variation that our figures have highlighted previously.23 Thus,
                                      the question we ask is a relative one: Do products with greater markup increases also have
                                      larger marginal cost reductions, bigger decreases in consumer price sensitivity, and so on? One
                                      might expect that the factors that explain markup growth may also have important causal
                                      effects, although causality cannot be established from descriptive regressions alone. We use
                                      the analysis to inform the more formal exploration of mechanisms that we conduct in the next
                                      section.
                                              Specifically, we regress product-level log markups on marginal costs, consumer preference
                                      parameters, consumer demographics, and measures of market concentration. We incorporate
                                           23These figures indicate that, in the time-series, rising markups correlate with lower marginal costs, lower con-
                                      sumerpricesensitivity, and lower product quality. We do not observe similar correlations between markups, income,
                                      andmarketconcentration. In our sample period, real income first decreases, then increases. Similarly, the trends in
                                      the concentration measures shown in Appendix Figure G.5 do not cleanly track the markup trends.
                                                                                                                                             19
                                      Table 2: Factors Predicting Cross-Category Variation in Markup Trends
                                                                 (1)           (2)           (3)          (4)           (5)           (6)
                                                                     ∗∗∗                                                                 ∗∗∗
                          Marginal Cost (Standardized)        −0.585                                                              −0.461
                                                               (0.020)                                                             (0.021)
                                                                                   ∗∗∗                                                   ∗∗∗
                          Price Sensitivity                                −0.728                                                 −0.397
                                                                            (0.025)                                                (0.022)
                          Quality (Standardized)                                         −0.137∗∗∗                                  0.002
                                                                                          (0.021)                                  (0.006)
                          Income (Log)                                                                   0.101∗∗∗                   0.061∗∗∗
                                                                                                        (0.029)                    (0.013)
                          Children at Home                                                             −0.114∗                    −0.017
                                                                                                        (0.065)                    (0.049)
                          Parent HHI                                                                                  0.323         0.221∗∗∗
                                                                                                                     (0.206)       (0.060)
                          Brand HHI                                                                                 −0.004        −0.102∗∗
                                                                                                                     (0.186)       (0.051)
                          Retailer HHI                                                                                0.192∗∗∗      0.069∗∗
                                                                                                                     (0.068)       (0.027)
                                                 etailer FEs      X             X             X            X             X             X
                          Brand-Category-DMA-R
                          Time Period FEs                         X             X             X            X             X             X
                          Observations                       14,406,731    14,406,731    14,406,731   14,406,731    14,406,674    14,406,674
                          R2 (Within)                          0.715         0.476         0.045         0.000        0.003         0.825
                      Notes: This table reports regression results where the dependent variable is log markups. Observations are at the
                      brand-category-DMA-retailer-year-quarter level, and brand-category-DMA-retailer and year-quarter fixed effects are
                      included in each specification. Standard errors are clustered at the category level and are reported in parentheses.
                      ∗ p < 0.10, ∗∗ p < 0.05, ∗∗∗ p < 0.01.
                      fixed effects at the brand-category-DMA-retailer level. We also include year fixed effects, as
                      explained above. Thus, the regression coefficients capture deviations from aggregate trends.
                      Although the regression coefficients are of interest, our main focus is on the ability of the
                      regressors to explain changes in markups, as reflected by their contribution to the R2.
                           For the consumer preference parameters, we include price sensitivity and perceived product
                      quality, as defined in the previous section. We standardize the product qualities and marginal
                                                                                                                  24
                      costs, separately for each category, so that they have a variance of one.                       For consumer demo-
                      graphics, we use log income and the presence of young children at home. Finally, for market
                      concentration, we examine three constructions of the Herfindahl-Hirschman Index (HHI). Par-
                      ent HHI is calculated for the upstream parent companies of the products (i.e. for the brand
                      manufacturers). Brand HHI is calculated under the counterfactual of single-product firms, and
                      serves to isolate changes in market concentration that are unrelated to product ownership. Fi-
                      nally, Retailer HHI is calculated for the retailers, separately for each category and region. We
                      measure the HHIs on a zero-to-one scale.25
                         24Standardization improves comparability across categories and also eases interpretation of the coefficients. We
                      choose this approach to standardization, rather than logs, to include observations with negative values.
                         25We use the consumer panel data to construct HHI measures. Our results are qualitatively similar if we instead
                      use the retail scanner data.
                                                                                  20
                      Table 2 summarizes the results. Column (1) indicates that marginal cost reductions alone
                  can explain 72 percent of the within-product variation in markups (within R2 = 0.715). The
                  coefficient implies that a one standard deviation reduction in marginal costs is associated with a
                  59percentincreaseinmarkups. Similarly, column (2) indicates that declines in price sensitivity
                  alone can explain 48 percent of the within-product variation in markups (within R2 = 0.476).
                  The coefficient indicates that a 10 percent decrease in price sensitivity is associated with a 7.3
                                                26
                  percent increase in markups.
                      Columns(3), (4), and (5) examine perceived quality, consumer demographics, and concen-
                  tration. Column (4), for example, indicates that markups increase more in regions with more
                  income growth. Although some of the coefficients are statistically significant, these measures
                  explain little of the variation in log markups. The within R2 values are all less than 0.05.
                      In column (6), we include all of the regressors. The coefficients on price sensitivity and
                  marginalcostsdeclinemodestly, butremainlargeinmagnitudeandstatisticallysignificant. The
                  coefficient on quality becomes effectively zero. Thus, though declines in relative perceived qual-
                  ity are correlated with increasing markups in the time series, products with greater increases
                  in quality do not realize differential changes in markups. The coefficients on the demographic
                  variables also shrink, though income remains statistically significant.
                      Turning to concentration, we find that parent HHI and retailer HHI are are positively cor-
                  related with changes in markups. Yet, these coefficients remain modest. The parent-HHI coef-
                  ficient of 0.221 in column (6) indicates that a change in parent company HHI of 0.02—i.e., a
                  200-point change on a 0 to 10,000 scale—is associated with a 0.4 percent increase in markups.
                  The relationship between markups and changes in concentration at the brand level (which
                  ignores multi-product ownership) is weaker.
                      The within R2 for the multivariate regression is 0.83. Thus, the regressors explain the bulk
                  of within-product markup deviations from the aggregate trends. Among these regressors, the
                  two that contribute the most are marginal costs and price sensitivity; a specification with these
                  two together yields a within R2 of 0.82. This helps focus our remaining efforts to understand
                  underlying mechanisms, to which we turn in Section 5.
                  4.5    Sensitivity Analyses and Robustness Checks
                  In this section, we describe several additional robustness checks and alternative specifications
                  to examine the sensitivity of our main results. In each of the analyses, the estimated trends in
                  markups and price sensitivity track our baseline estimates. We provide additional details and
                  present the results in Appendix E.
                    26Note that price sensitivity is measured at the category-year level, whereas markups and marginal costs may vary
                  across brands, DMAs, and retailers within each category-year. If we run regressions at the product category level,
                  wefind similar coefficients and a higher within R2 for price sensitivity. We report these results in Table G.4 in the
                  Appendix.
                                                                  21
                 (1) Markup measure: Our baseline measure of markups is the Lerner index, p−c. We find
                                                                               p
              very similar results if we instead use price-over-cost markups, p/c, as used by, e.g., De Loecker
              et al. (2020). We report the alternative markup trend in Appendix E.1.
                 (2) Product and retailer composition: To show that our trends are not due to changes in
              the composition of products and retailers within the sample, we re-estimate the model using a
              balanced panel of brand-chain-DMA combinations. The results are presented in Appendix E.2.
                 (3) Sample of categories: To obtain our baseline estimates, we use a sample of 133 cate-
              gories that feature modest degrees of price dispersion. We present our estimated markup and
              price sensitivity trends using a broader sample of the top 200 categories by revenue. The results
              are in Appendix E.3.
                 (4) Sample of retailers: Our baseline sample is constructed from the Retail Scanner Data,
              which comes from a sample of retail chains. One possible concern is that consumers select into
              the chains in our sample and that the selection has changed over time. To address this concern,
              weconstruct price and quantity data from the Consumer Panel Data for large retailers that are
              not included in the Retail Scanner Data, and we estimate the model including these additional
              retailers. We report the results in Appendix E.4.
                 (5) Sample of geographic markets: Our baseline sample includes the 22 DMAs with at
              least 500 householdsintheConsumerPaneldataforeachyearover2006–2019. Were-estimate
              the model using an expanded sample of 30 DMAs and a restricted sample of the 15 largest
              DMAs. The set of 30 DMAs includes all DMAs with at least 500 households in the Consumer
              Panel data for 2007–2019. We present the results in Appendix E.5.
                 (6) Number of brands: Our baseline analysis includes the top 20 brands in each category,
              and it aggregates the rest to a synthetic “fringe” brand. One question is whether our results
              dependonthenumberofbrandsaggregatedintothefringe. Asarobustnesscheck,weestimate
              our model instead using the top 15 brands, and we present the results in Appendix E.6.
                 (7) Time aggregation: Our baseline analysis aggregates the data to the quarterly level.
              Time aggregation involves a trade-off between the number of observations that are used to
              identify demand parameters and the sensitivity to short-run fluctuations induced, for instance,
              by temporary sales. To check the robustness of our results to the level of time aggregation,
              we include an alternative specification that aggregates to the semiannual level, instead of the
              quarterly level. We present these results in Appendix E.7.
                 (8) Market definition: We assume that each consumer shops within a retailer-DMA-year-
              quarter-category. Thus, our model does not allow consumers to shop across categories or across
              retailers within a DMA. Accounting for cross-category substitution by consumers goes beyond
              the scope of our analysis. As an indicator for the potential impact of cross-retailer substitution
              on our estimates, we consider an alternative specification where the market is defined at the
                                                  22
               level of a DMA-year-quarter-category. We estimate this specification by first aggregating the
               data across retailers within a DMA. We report the resulting estimates in Appendix E.8.
                 (9)Marketsize: Alargermarketsizeimplieshigherdiversiontotheoutsidegoodandlower
               diversion among the inside goods. Some demand systems, such as logit, place restrictions on
               diversion such that the estimates of consumer substitution are sensitive to the assumption on
               market size. Our random coefficients demand model can flexibly capture substitution between
               theinsidegoodsandtheoutsidegood,sothemarketsizeassumptionmaybelessconsequential.
               Still, we re-estimate the model using different assumptions on market size. We present the
               results of these robustness analyses in Appendix E.9.
               5 Mechanisms
               Theprevioussectionpresentedourfindingsofrisingmarkupsandprovideddescriptiveanalyses
               that indicate a high degree of correlation between rising markups, marginal cost reductions,
               anddecreasing consumer price sensitivity. Here, we use counterfactual simulations and a novel
               econometric decomposition to better understand whether these relationships are causal. We
               also provide additional descriptive evidence about the declines in price sensitivity.
               5.1  Counterfactual Simulations
               Weuse counterfactual simulations to assess the causal effects of aggregate trends in marginal
               costs and price sensitivity on markups. We start with the estimated model and data from 2006.
               Wethencomputeequilibriumpricesover2007-2019undersimulatedchangesinmarginalcosts
               and price sensitivity, holding fixed product assortments, consumer demographics, and other
               demand parameters. First, we scale marginal costs uniformly based on the estimated trend
               from Figure 2, holding price sensitivity fixed at 2006 levels. Second, we scale price sensitivity
               uniformly based on the estimated trend from Figure 3, holding marginal costs fixed at 2006
               levels. Third, we scale both marginal costs and price sensitivity. We obtain hypothetical time
               series that inform the extent to which aggregate trends contribute to rising markups.
                 Forreportingpurposes, weregressthelogoftheLernerindicesthatweobtainundereachof
               these counterfactual scenarios on quarter, year, and product-chain-region fixed effects, weight-
               ing by revenue. This follows the approach we use in Sections 4.2 and 4.3. The year fixed effects
               then summarize within-product markup changes over time.
                 Figure 4 depicts the results. The dash-dotted line plots changes in markups under the as-
               sumption that marginal costs track the aggregate trend but that demand and other factors are
               fixed. We find that marginal cost reductions alone yield an increase in markups of about 13
               percent over the sample period. The dashed line plots changes in markups under the assump-
               tion that price sensitivity tracks the aggregate trend but that other factors are fixed. Declines in
                                                    23
                                                 Figure 4: Simulated Markup Changes
                                      kups0.3
                                       0.25
                                        0.2
                                       0.15
                                        0.1
                                      ulated Change in Mar0.05
                                      Sim0
                                            2006    2008    2010    2012    2014    2016    2018
                                                   Only Marginal Costs       Only Price Sensitivity
                                                   Both                      Estimated Baseline
                  Notes: This figure plots counterfactual log changes in markups from simulations that scale marginal costs (dash-
                  dotted line), price sensitivities (dashed line), or both (solid line) according to the average realized changes that
                  are reported in Figures 2 and 3. Markups are defined by the Lerner index, (p − mc)/p, and changes are reported
                  relative to 2006. Product assortments, consumer demographics, and other demand parameters are held fixed at
                  2006 values in each simulated year. The solid gray line plots the estimated change in log markups in the realized
                  data for comparison.
                  price sensitivity alone yield in an increase in markups by about 15 percent. The solid black line
                  plots markup changes when both marginal costs and price sensitivity track aggregate trends,
                  while everything is held fixed. In that scenario, markups increase by about 29 percent (roughly
                  0.25 log points), and the overall trend is similar to the estimated changes in markups reported
                  in Figure 2, which we plot here with the solid gray line.
                      These counterfactual simulations indicate that aggregate changes in marginal costs and
                  price sensitivity can account for the vast majority of the time-series variation in markups.
                  Marginal cost reductions lead to higher markups because, in our estimated model, there is
                  incomplete pass-through of costs to equilibrium prices. A reduction in price sensitivity leads
                  to firms choosing higher prices and markups, all else equal. These factors have different rel-
                  ative impacts over time. For the first half of our sample, increases in markups can be mainly
                  attributed to changes in price sensitivity, while falling marginal costs are the primary driver of
                  rising markups in the second half. Together, the two trends explain approximately 85 percent
                  of the aggregate increase in markups by 2019.
                      The black line in Figure 4 nearly overlaps the estimated markup trend from 2006 through
                  2014. From 2014 to 2019, both the counterfactual and the estimated markups continue to
                  increase, but the lines diverge slightly. Several factors could explain these differences, including
                  factors we hold fixed (e.g., product assortment, demographics), as well as the fact that changes
                  in marginal costs and price sensitivity were not uniform across products. A counterfactual
                  that instead imposes category-level mean changes in marginal costs and price sensitivity yields
                  larger changes in markups that can fully explain the estimated change by 2019.
                                                                   24
                  5.2   Econometric Decomposition
                  Wenowdevelop a novel econometric decomposition that provides an alternative approach to
                  assessing the impact of price sensitivity. The thought experiment involves holding fixed the
                  data, and considering the implications of trends in the data for trends in markups, when inter-
                  preted through the lens of the model. Thus, it is conceptually distinct from the counterfactual
                  simulations of the previous section, which take as primitives the demand and cost parameters.
                      Our starting point is the result of MacKay and Miller (2023) that product-level additive
                  markups can be expressed in terms of the mean price parameter α and a known function of
                  data, λ(·), for a broad class of oligopoly models. With random coefficients logit demand and
                  Bertrand pricing, this takes the form:
                                   p    −c     =−1λ (s ,p ,x ,D ,ν ,Ω ;Π ,Π ,σ),                               (10)
                                    jcrt    jcrt    α jcrt   crt  crt  crt   rt  rt  rt   1   2
                  The arguments in λ(·) include vectors of market shares and prices (s        and p ). It also in-
                                                                                           crt      crt
                  cludes a matrix, x    , of non-price data that is interacted with the parameters Π , Π , and σ;
                                     crt                                                              1   2
                  in our implementation, x      is a vector of ones. Finally, D  and ν    contain consumer demo-
                                             crt                               rt       rt
                  graphics, and Ω    summarizes product ownership. Though λ(·) depends on the parameters Π ,
                                   rt                                                                             1
                  Π2, and σ, we identify these parameters by matching micro-moments and therefore treat them
                  as data for this exercise. Importantly, α has no effect on λ(·) conditional on the data.
                      Taking the quantity-weighted average within each category and year and dividing by aver-
                  age price, we obtain an expression for the aggregate Lerner index,
                                                         L=p−c=−1λ                                             (11)
                                                                p        αp
                  In logs, we obtain:                                          
                                               lnL=      −ln(−α)      + ln λ                                   (12)
                                                         |   {z   }             p
                                                      −1×Price Sensitivity  | {z }
                                                                         Observable Factors
                  This decomposes (log) category markups into price sensitivity (i.e., ln(−α)) and a term that
                  captures the net effect of observable factors: prices and market shares, product characteristics,
                  consumer demographics, consumer purchasing patterns, and the ownership of products (e.g.,
                  marketconcentration). By contrast, α is not observed and requires an additional identifying as-
                  sumption. Thus, the econometric decomposition allows us to assess the role of α in determining
                  markups, holding fixed the model specification and the observable factors in the data.
                      Figure 5 plots changes in the aggregate log Lerner index (lnL) and the contribution of ob-
                                           
                  servable factors (ln λ/p ) over the sample period, relative to 2006. Consistent with our earlier
                  findings, the average log Lerner index increases by 0.25 from 2006 to 2019. However, the
                  structural component decreases from 2006 to 2011 and remains below 2006 levels thereafter.
                                                                  25
                                                               Figure 5: Econometric Decomposition of Markup Trends
                                                                     .3
                                                                     .2
                                                                     .1
                                                                   Change in Index
                                                                     0
                                                                    -.1
                                                                      2006   2007   2008  2009   2010  2011   2012  2013   2014  2015   2016  2017   2018  2019
                                                                                                   Markups            Observable Factors
                              Notes: This figure shows the changes to the aggregate log Lerner Index (black line) and the empirical factors (dash-
                              dotted line) specified by equation (12). The difference between the lines is due to changes in price sensitivity.
                              In 2019, it is 5 percent lower than in 2006. Thus, without a change in price sensitivity, the
                              trends in the data are consistent with a modest decline in markups. If we were to estimate a
                              restricted model in which α were held fixed over time, then we would estimate that the log
                              Lerner index exactly tracks the contribution of the observable factors.
                                    Thus, to understand rising markups among the consumer products that we examine, it is
                              necessary to have an understanding of consumer price sensitivity and how it has changed over
                              time. An econometrician with data on product ownership, market shares, prices, and consumer
                              purchasing patterns—which are sufficient to recover λ(·) within a specific modeling context—
                              could make incorrect inferences about markup trends unless the model also allows for changes
                              in price sensitivity. This points to a strength of our modeling approach: as we estimate demand
                              separatelyforeachcategoryandeachyear,ourestimatesofpricesensitivitycanadjustflexibility
                              over time with the shifts in the empirical variation in the data.
                                    We also explore the cross-category variation in the components of equation (12). Within
                              individual years, we find that variation in price sensitivity explains a modest fraction of the
                              cross-sectional variation in markups: 16 percent in 2006 and 10 percent in 2019. Thus, it must
                              be that other features, such as consumer purchasing patterns and multi-product ownership,
                              explain most of the variation in markups across categories. As these features are included in
                              the observable factors component of the econometric decomposition, observable factors are
                              informative of cross-sectional variation in markups even without identification of α.
                                    Wealso consider a panel regression with observations at the category×year level in which
                              the dependentvariableistheyear-over-yearchangeinthe(log)aggregateLernerIndexandthe
                              independent variable is the year-over-year change in price sensitivity. We find that changes in
                              price sensitivity within categories over time explain 59 percent of the within-category variation
                              in markups over time. Though changes in price sensitivity explain the majority of the changes
                                                                                                             26
                           in markups at the category level, a meaningful portion of the category-level variation over time
                           is explained by observable factors. We report these results via regression in Appendix Table G.5.
                                 This finding, combined with the cross-sectional results, points to the flexibility of our model
                           to incorporate observable factors that are important for determining markups. Further, this
                           highlights that our demand specification is sufficiently rich to attribute much of the variation
                           in markups across categories to observable factors that are uncorrelated with mean price sen-
                           sitivity. This need not be the case with less flexible demand systems. For example, with con-
                           stant elasticity demand, the Lerner index only varies due to differences in price sensitivity (i.e.,
                           λ =p andln(λ /p ) = 0).
                             t       t               t    t
                           5.3       Explanations for the Decline in Price Sensitivity
                           Whydoes consumer price sensitivity decline? We consider three sets of possible explanations.
                           First, we consider whether our results might reflect an increasing selection by price-sensitive
                           consumers away from the retailers in our sample. Second, we consider whether the change
                           may reflect investments by firms to reduce price sensitivity directly, e.g., through marketing
                           expenditures. Third, we consider whether there is corroborating evidence for broad secular
                           changes in price sensitivity. We caveat that our analyses below are suggestive and may be
                           better addressed in future research.
                                 To address selection, we analyze how aggregate consumer spending patterns change over
                           time, and we consider how our estimates change with an extended sample of retailers. In
                           Appendix F, we document that revenue shares for the main retail channels that our products
                           are purchased—mass merchandisers, grocery stores, drug stores, warehouse clubs, and dollar
                           stores—are stable over our sample period. We validate this within the NielsenIQ data and
                           using auxiliary revenue data from large retailers. These data indicate that there are no broad
                           shifts in consumer spending among these channels. In Appendix E.4, we address selection
                           across retailers within these channels by providing estimates from an extended sample that
                           incorporates additional large retailers that are observed in the Consumer Panel Data, but not
                           the Retail Scanner Data. Our estimated markup and price sensitivity trends are very similar to
                           our baseline estimates. These analyses mitigate concerns that shifts across channels by price-
                           sensitive consumers might be driving our results.
                                 The second set of possibilities is that firms make investment decisions that lower consumer
                           price sensitivity. Such decisions might be reflected in marketing expenditures, R&D expendi-
                           tures, or the variety of products that they offer for a particular brand. In Appendix F.3, we
                           also show that changes in these variables do not explain changes in price sensitivity. Therefore,
                           we do not find support for the hypotheses that declining price sensitivity is due to firm-level
                           investment decisions.
                                 Finally, we consider whether changes in price sensitivity may reflect exogenous shifts in
                           preferences that are not the result of changes to supply. To explore this possibility, we exam-
                                                                                                   27
                                                  Figure 6: Coupon Use Over Time
                                         8                                                   4
                                         6                                                   3
                                         4                                                   2
                                                                                               Percent
                                        Coupons (Billions)
                                         2                                                   1
                                         0                                                   0
                                          1980  1985  1990  1995  2000  2005  2010  2015  2020
                                                          Redeemed     Redemption Rate
                  Notes: This figure shows the annual number of coupons redeemed (left axis) and the redemption rate out of all
                  issued coupons (right axis). From 2006 to 2019, coupon redemptions fell from 2.6 billion to 1.3 billion, and the
                  redemption rate fell from 0.90 percent to 0.56 percent. Annual estimates reflect total coupon usage for consumer
                  products in the United States across all channels, including free standing inserts and electronic coupons.
                  ine other information about consumer shopping patterns. In particular, we look at the use of
                  couponsandestimatesoftimespentshoppingforconsumerproducts. Couponredemptionsare
                  a plausible proxy for price sensitivity because they typically involve a small amount of effort in
                  order to obtain a discount on price. To evaluate coupon use, we collect statistics on the num-
                  ber of coupons distributed and redeemed for consumer packaged goods from 1981 through
                  2020. These statistics reflect industry estimates of coupon use across all channels, including
                  free standing inserts and electronic coupons.27
                      Figure 6 plots the aggregate coupon usage over time. The black line reports the number of
                  coupons redeemed each year (left axis). From 1981 to 1992, the number of coupons redeemed
                  roughly doubled, from 4.1 billion to 7.7 billion. Since that year, there has been a steady decline
                  in the number of coupons redeemed, with the exception of a brief bump due to the recession
                  starting in 2009. Over our sample period, the number of coupons redeemed has fallen in half,
                  from 2.6 billion in 2006 to 1.3 billion in 2019.
                      This trend reflects a decreasing propensity of consumers to use coupons, rather than coupon
                  availability. To highlight this, the dashed line plots the percent of coupons that are redeemed
                  out of all the coupons that were distributed (right axis). Redemption rates are declining over
                  the entire sample period. From 1981 to 1992, the decline reflects the fact that the growth in the
                  distribution of coupons outpaced the growth in coupon redemption rates. From 1992 to 2015,
                  the annual number of coupons issued remained high while redemption rates fell. In 2015, 316
                  billion coupons were distributed, compared to 309 billion in 1992. From 2016 to 2020, fewer
                  coupons were distributed each year, but redemption fell even faster. The redemption rate fell
                  from 0.90 in 2006 to 0.56 in 2019.
                    27Industry estimates were obtained from reports by two companies, NCH Marketing from 1981 through 2002,
                  and Inmar Intelligence from 2003 through 2020.
                                                                  28
                          Concurrently, adults in the U.S. spent less time shopping for consumer products. Data from
                      the American Time Use Survey indicate that both the frequency and duration of shopping trips
                      declined over our sample period. For adults between the ages of 25 and 54, time spent on
                      consumer goods purchases fell by 21 percent, from 3.01 to 2.38 hours per week.28 We also
                      find that, in the consumer panel data, households visit approximately 10 percent fewer unique
                      retailers each week on average in 2019 compared to 2006. This seems to reflect a long-run
                      trend. Aguiar and Hurst (2007b) and Aguiar et al. (2013) provide evidence for reduced time
                      spent shopping between the 1960s and 2003 and between 2003 and 2010, respectively.
                          Overall, the declining use of coupons and the reduced time spent purchasing consumer
                      goods suggest a fundamental shift in consumer shopping behavior that is consistent with lower
                      price sensitivity arising from exogenous factors. Both trends indicate that consumers are less
                      willing to exert effort to obtain lower prices. For instance, Aguiar and Hurst (2007a) provide
                      evidence that shopping intensity is negatively correlated with consumer prices. Notably, the
                      decline in coupon use began in the early 1990s, before the rise of online retail. We view
                      this as additional evidence that declining price sensitivity reflects a longer-run secular trend.
                      A potential explanation for this trend is an increase in the opportunity costs of time spent
                      shopping, possibly due to changes in preferences for leisure, or changes to labor supply and the
                      within-householddistribution of wages. Consistent with the latter, Griffith et al. (2022) provide
                      evidence that the opportunity cost of time for households in the United Kingdom has increased
                      since the 1980s, and that this change is correlated with an increase in labor force participation
                      and earnings among secondary earners.29
                      6 Markups,Welfare, and Consumer Surplus
                      In this section, we analyze how consumer surplus, producer surplus, and total welfare for
                      consumer products have changed over time. We also examine various counterfactual scenarios
                      in order to estimate the deadweight loss from (changes in) market power and to explore the
                      consequences of rising markups for consumers and firms.
                                                                                                                                   30
                          Wefollow Small and Rosen (1981) and calculate consumer surplus in dollar terms.                              This
                      yields the additional consumer surplus provided by the products in our sample, relative to a
                      counterfactual in which only the outside option is available to consumers. Thus, it can be
                        28The American Time Use Survey reports both the frequency of adults participating in an activity in a given day,
                      which declined by 5 percent, and the daily time spent conditional on participation, which declined by 16 percent.
                        29An alternative potential explanation, following results in the marketing literature, is that consumers are re-
                      sponding to broad shifts in the pricing behavior of firms. For example, Mela et al. (1997) argues that price-oriented
                      promotions increase consumer price sensitivity in the long run. Therefore, a decline in price sensitivity could poten-
                      tially be a response to a large-scale decline in price-oriented promotional activity.                       
                        30With the observed set of products, consumer surplus is given by CS = − 1 P 1 ln P exp(wij)                  where
                                                                                                         N    i α        j
                                                                                                                 i
                      w =β∗+α∗p           +ξ +ξ +ξ +∆ξ               for the inside products (j > 0), w   =0fortheoutside good (j = 0),
                        ij    i     i jcrt    jr    cr    t      jcrt                                  0j
                      and N denotes the number of consumers.
                                                                               29
                                             Table 3: Annual Surplus and Welfare Per Capita
                                                        (a) 2006 Preferences and Costs
                              Specification                           CS    PS     W %changeCS %changeW
                              Baseline                               678   264   942             0.0           0.0
                              Prices Scaled to 2019 Price Levels     653   268   920            -3.7          -2.3
                              Markups Scaled to 2019 Markup Levels   600   293   893           -11.5          -5.2
                              Prices Equal to Marginal Costs         999      0  999            47.3           6.0
                                                        (b) 2019 Preferences and Costs
                             Specification                            CS    PS      W %changeCS %changeW
                             Baseline                                942   369   1311             0.0           0.0
                             Prices Scaled to 2006 Price Levels      975   348   1323             3.5           0.9
                             Markups Scaled to 2006 Markup Levels   1111   236   1347            17.9           2.7
                             Prices Equal to Marginal Costs         1379      0  1379            46.4           5.2
                         Notes: This table reports consumer surplus (CS), producer surplus (PS), and welfare (W) per capita
                         based on estimated demand parameters (“Baseline”) and for counterfactual scenarios that hold fixed
                         preferences and marginal costs and vary the price levels.
                   interpreted as the equivalent variation that would compensate consumers for the loss of the
                   product-retailer combinations in our data.31 Our measure of producer surplus reflects variable
                   profits and is measured as price less marginal costs multiplied with quantities: PS = P             (p −
                                                                                                                    j>0  j
                   cj)qj. Our measure of producer surplus does not reflect fixed costs, thus this analysis does
                   not inform whether brand manufacturers earn economic profit. We measure welfare (W) as
                   the sum of producer and consumer surplus. The deadweight loss that exists in an observed
                   equilibrium can be calculated by comparing the welfare that obtains with the equilibrium to
                   the welfare that obtains under a counterfactual with prices set equal to marginal costs.
                       These exercises have an important limitation when considering overall welfare. We do not
                   take a stance on utility received outside of the products in our sample, and our consumer
                   surplus calculations are relative to the outside utility value. Thus, overall consumer welfare
                   may decline even if we find increasing consumer surplus for the products in our sample. For
                   example, if housing became more expensive, consumers may get greater relative utility from
                   consumer products but be worse off. For these reasons, we focus on exploring the relationship
                   between markups and welfare within the products and markets of our sample.
                       Table 3 shows per capita consumer, producer surplus, and welfare for 2006 and 2019 using
                   observed prices (“Baseline”) and prices under different counterfactual scenarios. To compute
                   counterfactual values, we hold fixed estimated preference parameters and marginal costs, and
                   wesimulate consumer choices using different prices. We consider three counterfactual scenar-
                   ios. First, we scale all prices by the average realized price change for all products in the same
                   category from one year to another (e.g., from 2006 to 2019). Second, we scale all markups
                      31Themodelassumescompleteinformation,while,inreality,consumersmayfacesearchcostsorotherfrictionsthat
                   are not explicitly captured by this representation. Consumers may engage in search both across and within retailers.
                   If search costs are increasing over time, that may be reflected in our estimates as a reduction in price sensitivity.
                                                                       30
                  by the average realized markup change for all products in that category from one year to
                  another. Because we hold marginal costs fixed, scaling 2006 prices to match 2019 markups
                  results in higher prices than what we observe in the data. Third, we consider a counterfactual
                  whereprices equal marginal costs (i.e., no markups). The last two columns in each panel show
                  changes in consumer surplus and welfare relative to the baseline scenario.32
                     Comparing the baseline scenarios, the results indicate that per capita consumer surplus
                  increased by about 39 percent (i.e., about 2.6 percent annually) between 2006 and 2019, from
                  $678to$942. Asaveragepricesdidnotdeclineandperceivedrelative quality did not increase,
                  the increase in consumer surplus is likely due to lower price sensitivity, i.e., that consumers
                  receive lower disutility from any given price in 2019. Along with higher markups, producer
                  surplus increased over the period, from $264 to $369 per capita. Thus, approximately 70% of
                  the increase in welfare have accrued to consumers.
                     Markups are costly for consumers. With marginal cost pricing, consumer surplus would be
                  substantially higher in both 2006 and 2019, as shown by the final specification in each panel.
                  Our estimates suggest that markups in 2006 reduced per capita welfare from $999 to $942 (6
                  percent). In 2019, markups reduced welfare by about 5 percent.
                     The changes in markups over this period are economically meaningful. Holding fixed the
                  2006 preferences, marginal costs, and product assortments, increasing markups to 2019 levels
                  would reduce consumer surplus by 11.5 percent. However, markups trends do not occur in
                  isolation. Changes in markups are often concurrent with and in response to other factors. For
                  example, declining marginal costs mitigate the impact of rising markups on prices and con-
                  sumer welfare. When scaling up prices—which are the relevant demand variables—to match
                  2019levels, the decrease in consumer surplus is much smaller (3.7 percent). Analogous results
                  obtain if 2019 markups and prices are scaled down to 2006 levels.
                     Thus, to interpret the impacts of changing markups on welfare, it is necessary to take a
                  stand on what other factors are changing at the same time. Markups are equilibrium objects
                  that are determined by supply and demand. If marginal costs and price sensitivity had not
                  changed, the aggregate trends in markups would have likely looked quite different. This is an
                  important consideration for potential policy responses to markup trends.
                     In our final analysis, we analyze how the change in consumer surplus varies by income.
                  For this purpose, we calculate the log of consumer surplus per purchasing decision separately
                  by each quartile of the income distribution and for each category-year. We relate these values
                  to category and year fixed effects and document the coefficients across years in Figure 7. The
                  results indicate that the increase in per capita consumer surplus between 2006 and 2019 is
                  mainly driven by consumers with relatively high income and takes place during the second
                  half of the sample period. In contrast, the lowest quartile of the income distribution has lower
                    32To mitigate the potential impact of outliers, we winsorize the consumer surplus estimates at the 1st and 99th
                  percentiles from the pooled set of 133 categories across 14 years and 6 scenarios: baseline, scaling prices or markups
                  to 2006 levels, scaling prices or markups to 2019 levels, and prices equal to marginal costs (11,166 observations).
                                                                 31
                                                                Figure 7: Consumer Surplus Over Time By Income Group
                                                                       0.6
                                                                       0.4                                                                          l
                                                                                                                                                   l
                                                                                                                                              l           l
                                                                                                                                        l                l      l
                                                                                                                                             l   l             l
                                                                       0.2                                                             l
                                                                                                                                   l        l          l     l
                                                                                               l     l                       l        l
                                                                                          l                                       l              l
                                                                                               l                 l     l
                                                                                ll l     l          l           l                                     l
                                                                         0          l                      l                l        l     l                l
                                                                                                              l       l         l
                                                                                       l     l     l      l
                                                                                                             l      l     l
                                                                    Change in CS                        l
                                                                     −0.2             l     l                      l           l
                                                                                                  l
                                                                                                        l                l
                                                                     −0.4
                                                                               2006        2008        2010       2012        2014        2016        2018
                                                                           l    1st Quart.          l     nd                l      rd                l     th
                                                                                                        2  Quart.                3  Quart.                4  Quart.
                               Notes: This figure reports coefficients and 95 percent confidence intervals of a regression of the log of consumer
                               surplus by purchase on year dummies, controlling for category fixed effects, separately for different quartiles of the
                               income distribution.
                               consumer surplus through 2016. The reduction in consumer surplus for the lowest-income
                               households coincides with the increase in real prices in the first half of our sample. After
                               this point, real prices fall and consumer surplus for this quartile increases, recovering to 2006
                               levels at the end of the sample period. In Figure G.6 in the Appendix, we repeat the analysis
                               dividing the sample into deciles. The results confirm that changes in consumer surplus are
                               strongly associated with the income distribution. Consumers in the highest income group see
                               increases in consumer surplus over time, while lower income households have, on average,
                               lower consumer surplus over our sample period. These findings suggest that changes in market
                               power and consumer preferences over time have important distributional consequences.
                               7 Conclusion
                               This paper analyzes the evolution of markups in consumer products in the United States be-
                               tween 2006 and 2019. We estimate demand with flexible consumer preferences and recover
                               time-varyingmarkupsforindividualproductsundertheassumptionofprofitmaximization. Our
                               results indicate that markups increased by about 30 percent during our sample period. This re-
                               flects within-product changes and is primarily due to reductions in marginal costs, rather than
                               increases in (real) prices. Changes in marginal costs, along with declining consumer price sen-
                               sitivity, account for the vast majority of the time series variation in aggregate markup changes
                               between 2006 and 2019.
                                     Ourmodelindicatesthatconsumersurplushasincreaseddespiterisingmarkups,thoughthe
                               increases are concentrated among higher-income consumers. The standard welfare measure
                               in our analysis does not account for changes to outside options or why price sensitivity has
                               declined, and it imposes simplifying assumptions, such as full information. We welcome future
                               workthatexploreswelfareimpactsingreaterdetail while addressing some of these limitations.
                                                                                                                 32
               References
                AGHION, P., N. BLOOM, R. BLUNDELL, R. GRIFFITH, AND P. HOWITT (2005): “Competition and
                 Innovation: An Inverted-U Relationship,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 120, 701–728.
                AGUIAR, M. AND E. HURST (2007a): “Life-cycle prices and production,” American Economic
                 Review, 97, 1533–1559.
               ———(2007b): “Measuring trends in leisure: The allocation of time over five decades,”
                 Quarterly Journal of Economics, 122, 969–1006.
                AGUIAR, M., E. HURST, AND L. KARABARBOUNIS (2013): “Time use during the great recession,”
                 American Economic Review, 103, 1664–1696.
                ANDERSON, E., S. REBELO, AND A. WONG (2023): “Markups Across Space and Time,” Working
                 paper.
                ARCIDIACONO, P., P. B. ELLICKSON, C. F. MELA, AND J. D. SINGLETON (2020): “The Compet-
                 itive Effects of Entry: Evidence from Supercenter Expansion,” American Economic Journal:
                 Applied Economics, 12, 175–206.
                ATALAY, E., E. FROST, A. T. SORENSEN, C. J. SULLIVAN, AND W. ZHU (2023): “ScalableDemand
                 and Markups,” Tech. rep., National Bureau of Economic Research.
                BACKUS, M., C. CONLON, AND M. SINKINSON (2021): “Common Ownership and Competition
                 in the Ready-to-Eat Cereal Industry,” Working paper.
                BERRY,  S. (1994):   “Estimating Discrete-Choice Models of Product Differentiation,”
                 RANDJournalofEconomics, 25, 242–262.
                BERRY, S. AND P. JIA (2010): “An Empirical Analysis of the Airline Industry,” American
                 Economic Journal: Microeconomics, 2, 1–43.
                BERRY, S., J. LEVINSOHN, AND A. PAKES (1995): “Automobile Prices in Market Equilibrium,”
                 Econometrica, 841–890.
               ———(2004): “Differentiated products demand systems from a combination of micro and
                 macro data: The new car market,” Journal of political Economy, 112, 68–105.
                BERRY, S. T. AND P. A. HAILE (2021): “Foundations of Demand Estimation,” Handbook of
                 Industrial Organization, Volume 4, edited by Kate Ho, Ali Hortacsu, and Alessandro Lizzeri,
                 Elsevier.
               ———(2022): “Nonparametric Identification of Differentiated Products Demand Using Micro
                 Data,” Working paper.
                                                        33
        BRAND, J. (2021): “Differences in Differentiation: Rising Variety and Markups in Retail Food
         Stores,” Working paper.
        BRUNNER, D., F. HEISS, A. ROMAHN, AND C. WEISER (2020): “Reliable Estimation of Random
         Coefficient Logit Demand Models,” Working paper.
        BUTTERS, R. A., D. W. SACKS, AND B. SEO (2022): “How Do National Firms Respond to Local
         Shocks? Evidence from Excise Taxes,” American Economic Review, 112, 1737–72.
        CAOUI, E. H., B. HOLLENBECK, AND M. OSBORNE (2023): “The Impact of Dollar Store Expan-
         sion on Local Market Structure and Food Access,” Working Paper.
        CHEVALIER, J. A., A. K. KASHYAP, AND P. E. ROSSI (2003): “Why Don’t Prices Rise during
         Periods of Peak Demand? Evidence from Scanner Data,” American Economic Review, 93,
         15–37.
        CILIBERTO, F., C. MURRY, AND E. TAMER (2021): “Market Structure and Competition in Airline
         Markets,” Journal of Political Economy, 129, 2995–3038.
        CONLON, C. AND J. GORTMAKER (2020): “Best Practices for Differentiated Products Demand
         Estimation with PyBLP,” RAND Journal of Economics, 51, 1108–1161.
        DE LOECKER, J. (2011): “Recovering Markups from Production Data,” International Journal of
         Industrial Organization, 29, 350–355.
        DE LOECKER, J. AND J. EECKHOUT (2021): “Global Market Power,” Working paper.
        DE LOECKER, J., J. EECKHOUT, AND G. UNGER (2020): “The Rise of Market Power and the
         Macroeconomic Implications,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 135, 561–644.
        DE LOECKER, J. AND P. SCOTT (2022): “Markup Estimation using Production and Demand
         Data. An Application to the US Brewing Industry,” Working paper.
        DELOECKER, J. AND F. WARZYNSKI (2012): “MarkupsandFirm-LevelExportStatus,” American
         Economic Review, 102, 2437–2471.
        DELLAVIGNA, S. AND M. GENTZKOW (2019): “Uniform Pricing in US Retail Chains,” Quarterly
         Journal of Economics, 134, 2011–2084.
        ELZINGA, K. G. AND D. E. MILLS (2011): “The Lerner Index of Monopoly Power: Origins and
         Uses,” American Economic Review, 101, 558–564.
        GANAPATI, S. (2021): “Growing Oligopolies, Prices, Output, and Productivity,” Americal
         Economic Journal: Microeconomics, 13, 309–327.
                            34
        ———(2024): “The Modern Wholesaler: Global Sourcing, Domestic Distribution, and Scale
         Economies,” Working paper.
        GANDHI, A. AND J.-F. HOUDE (2020): “Measuring Substitution Patterns in Differentiated Prod-
         ucts Industries,” Working paper.
        GANDHI, A. AND A. NEVO (2021): “Empirical Models of Demand and Supply in Differentiated
         Products Industries,” Handbook of Industrial Organization, Volume 4, edited by Kate Ho, Ali
         Hortacsu, and Alessandro Lizzeri, Elsevier.
        GRIECO, P. L. E., C. MURRY, AND A. YURUKOGLU (2023): “The Evolution of Market Power in
         the US Automobile Industry,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, forthcoming.
        GRIFFITH, R., W. M. JIN, AND V. LECHENE (2022): “The Decline of Home-cooked Food,” Fiscal
         Studies, 43, 105–120.
        HALL, R. E. (1986): “Market Structure and Macroeconomic Fluctuations,” Brookings Papers on
         Economic Activity, 2, 285–322.
        ———(1988): “The Relation Between Price and Marginal Cost in U.S. Industry,” Journal of
         Political Economy, 96, 921–947.
        ———(1990): “Invariance Properties of Solow’s Productivity Residual,” In Peter A. Diamond
         (ed), Growth, Productivity, Unemployment: Essays to Celebrate Bob Solow’s Birthday, MIT
         Press.
        HARBERGER, A. C. (1954): “Monopoly and Resource Allocation,” American Economic Review
         (Papers and Proceedings), 44, 77–87.
        HAUSMAN, J. A. (1996): “Valuation of New Goods Under Perfect and Imperfect Competition,”
         in The Economics of New Goods, ed. by T. Bresnahan and R. Gordon, Chicago: University of
         Chicago Press, 209–248.
        HENDEL, I. AND A. NEVO (2013): “Intertemporal Price Discrimination in Storable Goods Mar-
         kets,” American Economic Review, 103, 2722–2751.
        HRISTAKEVA, S. (2022): “Vertical Contracts with Endogenous Product Selection: An Empirical
         Analysis of Vendor-Allowance Contracts,” Journal of Political Economy, 130, 3202–3252.
        LERNER, A. P. (1934): “The Concept of Monopoly and the Measurement of Monopoly Power,”
         Review of Economic Studies, 1, 157–175.
        MACKAY, A. AND N. H. MILLER (2023): “Estimating Models of Supply and Demand: Instru-
         ments and Covariance Restrictions,” Working paper.
                            35
            MELA, C. F., S. GUPTA, AND D. R. LEHMANN (1997): “The Long-Term Impact of Promotion and
              Advertising on Consumer Brand Choice,” Journal of Marketing Research, 34, 248–261.
            MILLER, N. H. (2024): “Industrial Organization and The Rise of Market Power,” Working Paper.
            MILLER, N. H., M. OSBORNE, G. SHEU, AND G. SILEO (2023): “Technology and Market Power:
              The United States Cement Industry, 1974-2019,” Working paper.
            MILLER, N. H. AND M. C. WEINBERG (2017): “Understanding the Price Effects of the Miller-
              Coors Joint Venture,” Econometrica, 85, 1763–1791.
            MIRAVETE, E. J., K. SEIM, AND J. THURK (2022): “Robust pass-through estimation in discrete
              choice models,” Tech. rep., Working paper, Department of Economics, University of Pennsyl-
              vania.
            ——— (2023):  “Pass-through and tax incidence in differentiated product markets,”
              International Journal of Industrial Organization, 90, 102985.
            NAKAMURA, E. AND D. ZEROM (2010): “Accounting for Incomplete Pass-through,” Review of
              Economic Studies, 77, 1192–1230.
            NEVO, A. (2000a): “Mergers with Differentiated Products: The Case of the Ready-to-Eat Cereal
              Industry,” RAND Journal of Economics, 31, 395–421.
            ———(2000b): “A Practitioner’s Guide to Estimation of Random Coefficients Logit Models of
              Demand,” Journal of Economics and Management Strategy, 9, 513–548.
            ———(2001): “Measuring Market Power in the Ready-to-Eat Cereal Industry,” Econometrica,
              69, 307–342.
            PELTZMAN, S. (2022): “Productivity, Prices and Productivity in Manufacturing: a Demsetzian
              Perspective,” Journal of Law and Economics, 65.
            SMALL, K. A. AND H. S. ROSEN (1981): “Applied Welfare Economics with Discrete Choice
              Models,” Econometrica, 105–130.
            VILLAS-BOAS, S. B. (2007): “Vertical Relationships Between Manufacturers and Retailers: In-
              ference with Limited Data,” Review of Economic Studies, 74, 625–652.
                                           36
